In the subsequent investigation the commission concluded that center of gravity and takeoff weights of both aircraft were within the normal range and that there was no explosion or fire prior to the collision. The commission also found that maintenance was carried out in accordance with the requirements of the regulations and that the level of training of flight crews of both aircraft, as well as their work experience, were not the cause of the crash.
When the commission examined the action of the controllers they discovered a series of errors made by Zhukovsky:
Refused Flight 7628's request to climb from 8400 meters to 9600 meters, stating it was in dangerous proximity to aircraft 65132. The interval was 55 kilometers – close to the minimum, although the safety distance between 65132 and Flight 7628 could have been increased by reducing the ground speed of the latter.
Directed Flight 7880 to climb from 7200 meters to 8400 meters, although the crew did not request this. As a result, there was a conflict situation with Flight 7628.
Did not allow aircraft 86676 to climb to 10,200 meters. This would have increased the safety distance between it and aircraft 65132.
Allowed crews to violate radio rules and argued with the manager about the instructions received. Two minutes and 51 seconds before the collision, Zhukovsky began a 47-second argument with the crew of a Ukrainian Yakovlev Yak-40 identified as aircraft 87327, explaining the need for them to go to another altitude.
The investigators also discovered that the more experienced controller, Vladimir Alexandrovich Sumy, was in error during the last minutes before the crash, having received a vague answer without a call sign, he did not confirm if the crew of Flight 7880 understood. Sumy had previously received penalties for violations, including improper communication and phraseology.
The senior controller, Sergei Sergeev, was found to have complicated the air traffic control environment by changing the responsibilities assigned to personnel, including assigning Sumy to supervise Zhukovsky.
Nine months after the disaster, a court sentenced controllers Nikolai Zhukovsky and Vladimir Sumy to 15 years imprisonment in a penal colony. Vladimir Sumy served 6.5 years then was released for good behavior. As of 2008, he lived in Kharkiv. Nikolai Zhukovsky reportedly committed suicide. Sergei Sergeev, the chief controller on duty that day, was not prosecuted.
The final conclusion made by the commission was:"The cause of the disaster were the mistakes and violations of the NPP GA-78 made by manager of the southwestern sector and dispatcher instructor regarding destination tier and providing the established intervals between aircraft compliance phraseology".