It was clear from the outset that MARC #286 had not complied with the speed restrictions of the approach signal and consequently overran the stop signal, making the crash inevitable. The deaths of all three MARC crew members in the collision meant that the reason for the failure would remain unknown; in its report NTSB ascribed it to "the apparent failure of the engineer and the traincrew because of multiple distractions to operate MARC train 286..." The focus of the investigators and the public shifted to safety systems which could have prevented the crash and the design of the commuter rail cars themselves.
One of the crew members and seven of the eight MARC passengers who died were killed not by the collision itself but by a fire started when the exposed diesel fuel tanks on the Amtrak locomotive ruptured. Emergency responders were unable to open the doors on the lead passenger car. Passengers on other cars reported trying to break the window glass but being unable to do so. The NTSB found the existing emergency egress standards for passenger cars were inadequate, and recommended multiple changes, including:
that passenger cars be required to have "quick release" mechanisms for exterior doors
that passenger car windows be removable in the event of an emergency
that emergency exits be marked with "luminescent or retroreflective material"
Prior to the NTSB issuing its report MARC had taken steps in that direction, including the installation of more emergency windows, the improvement of door release mechanisms, and improved emergency signage.
Much criticism focused on the role of human error in the collision; once the engineer had forgotten (or missed) the approach signal there was no automatic system to prevent the collision. The NTSB noted that had a positive train control system been in place on the Metropolitan Subdivision the collision would have been less likely: the system would have detected MARC #286's unauthorized speed and stopped the train. The NTSB also strongly criticized CSX and the Federal Transit Administration for the removal of a signal between Kensington and Georgetown Junction as part of capacity improvements on the Metropolitan Subdivision. The NTSB argued that having this signal after Kensington would have reduced the likelihood of the sort of human error which caused the crash, and in the NTSB's view CSX and the FTA did not properly assess the effects of removing the signal.