The two-track railroad line between Brunswick, Maryland, and Union Station in Washington, D.C., is owned by CSX Transportation (save for approaches to Union Station) and is known as the Metropolitan Subdivision. MARC operates commuter services, known as the Brunswick Line, from Washington to Brunswick and points west. Amtrak operates the single daily Capitol Limited, a Washington–Chicago overnight train, over the route as well, though it makes fewer stops.
MARC #286 departed Brunswick at 4:30 PM Eastern time on February 16, 1996. #286 was a Brunswick–Washington, D.C., commuter train with a scheduled arrival at Union Station of 5:30 PM. The NTSB described the conditions that day as a "blowing snowfall" with a 5-inch (130 mm) accumulation. At the time CSX provided the operating crew for MARC commuter trains under contract to the Maryland Mass Transit Administration; aboard were an engineer, conductor, and assistant conductor. The train consisted of an EMD GP39H-2 diesel locomotive, two passenger coaches, and a control car. The train operated in push-pull mode, meaning that the locomotive was on the rear of the train and the locomotive engineer controlled operations from the control car in the front. MARC #286 had twenty passengers on board.
Amtrak #29, the Capitol Limited, departed Union Station at 5:25 PM, bound for Chicago. That day the Capitol Limited consisted of two diesel locomotives, a GE P40DC no. 811 and an EMD F40PHR, no. 255; six material handling cars; a baggage car; a Superliner transition sleeping car; two Superliner sleeping cars; a Superliner dining car; a Superliner Sightseer Lounge car; two Superliner coaches; and a Hi-Level dormitory-coach. The Capitol Limited had four crew, fourteen service personnel, and 164 passengers on board.

The two tracks of the Metropolitan Subdivision are numbered 1 and 2. MARC #286 was on track 2, having made a flag stop at Kensington to pick up two passengers. The Capitol Limited was also on track 2, having passed a stopped freight train on track 1. Both trains were approaching Georgetown Junction, where the Capitol Limited was to switch to track 1. The signal protecting Georgetown Junction indicated STOP on track 2, which would have the effect of stopping MARC #286 and permitting the Capitol Limited to change tracks. Before reaching Kensington MARC #286 passed an APPROACH signal. The purpose of that signal was to warn the train's crew that the next signal would be a stop signal and that maximum speed was restricted to 30 miles per hour (48 km/h). For reasons unknown the crew of MARC #286 did not obey this restriction and after departing Kensington the train reached 66 miles per hour (106 km/h) before the crew applied the emergency brakes. The Capitol Limited had reached Georgetown Junction and begun crossing over to track 1. MARC #286 struck the Amtrak train at approximately 38 miles per hour (61 km/h) at 5:39 PM.
All three crew members aboard the MARC train were killed along with eight passengers. 26 people were injured. The collision destroyed both MARC passenger cars and the control car as well as one of the two Amtrak locomotives, EMD F40PHR #255. The turnouts at Georgetown Junction were damaged and had to be replaced. The total damage was estimated at $7.5 million.