On August 14, 2009, the National Transportation Safety Board released a report regarding the incident. The report discussed several aspects of the collision, including locations of origin of the aircraft, planned destination, and air traffic control communications. In addition, the report discussed how one of the controllers at Teterboro Airport was on a phone call and did not warn the airplane pilot of the potential conflict. The National Air Traffic Controller's Union (NATCA) then issued their own press release disputing some of the phrasing in the NTSB's report. The NTSB then retracted some of its statements regarding the controller's part in the crash, saying that the controller could not have warned the plane about the tour helicopter because the tour helicopter was not on the controller's radar. The NTSB also removed NATCA as a party to the investigation as a result of NATCA's press release, as parties to NTSB investigations agree to let the NTSB control publicity during the investigation. NATCA may still submit information to the board regarding the accident, but they will not hold a seat on the investigation board.
Due to the accident, the FAA put the Teterboro controller and his supervisor on leave and made comments about the phone call, which was deemed improper behavior. However, the NTSB rebuked the FAA for doing so, stating that only the NTSB has the authority to determine the controller's contribution to the incident.
On September 14, 2010, the NTSB released its final report on the incident. The report cited two primary causes of the accident: (1) the "inherent limitations" of the see-and-avoid concept, which meant that from the airplane pilot's point of view, the helicopter would have appeared as a small, stationary object against a backdrop of the New York City skyline until the final seconds before the collision; and (2) the Teterboro controller's personal phone call, which distracted him from his air traffic control duties and prevented him from correcting the airplane pilot's incorrect readback of the Newark control tower's radio frequency. [1]