ATLAST proposals have a primary mirror diameter in the 8 to 16.8 meters (26 to 55 ft) range. Two different telescope architectures have been identified for ATLAST, but with similar optical designs, that span the range in technologies. The architectures are a telescope with a monolithic primary mirror and two variations of a telescope with a large segmented primary mirror. The concepts invoke heritage from the HST and JWST designs, but also take significant departures from these designs to minimize complexity, mass, or both. ATLAST would have an angular resolution that is 5–10 times better than JWST and a sensitivity limit that is up to 2,000 times better than HST.
Two of the concepts, the 8 meters (26 ft) monolithic mirror telescope and the 16.8 meters (55 ft) segmented mirror telescope, span the range of UVOIR (ultraviolet, optical, infrared) observatories that are enabled by NASA's proposed Space Launch System (SLS) vehicle. The third concept, a 9.2 meters (30 ft) segmented mirror telescope is compatible with the existing Evolved Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV).
The 8 m ATLAST offers the inherent advantages of a monolithic aperture telescope in terms of high-contrast imaging and superb wavefront control. The 16 m segmented mirror ATLAST represents a pathway to truly large apertures in space and uses the largest extrapolation of a JWST-like chord-fold primary mirror packaging. The 9.2 m segmented mirror ATLAST adopts JWST design heritage, essentially being an incrementally larger variant of the JWST, which has a 6.5 m segmented main mirror.
ATLAST would be able to be serviced, much like the HST has been. Using either a robotic ferry (the currently proposed method), or an astronaut crew flying in an Orion spacecraft (which would allow NASA to gain experience for future manned Solar System missions), instruments such as cameras would be replaced and returned to Earth for analysis and future upgrades. Like the HST and proposed JWST, ATLAST would be powered by solar panels.
The ATLAST technology development plan is supported with funding from NASA's Astrophysics Strategic Mission Concept Studies program, the Goddard Space Flight Center, the Marshall Space Flight Center, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and related programs at Northrop Grumman Aerospace Systems and Ball Aerospace.