The overall response can be quickly sketched through inspection by first
determining the initial and final interval values of the voltage on the capacitor.
Initial Interval (t ≤ 0
−
),
the effective circuit is as shown in Figure 10.11b, with a DC source with volt-
age VO appearing across the capacitor. Thus, the capacitor voltage is VO
during t < 0
and t = 0,
and still within the initial interval, the capacitor is not connected to any other
circuit (recall S1 is opened at t = 0
and S2 is closed immediately thereafter
at t = 0). Assuming the capacitor is ideal, it holds its charge and so its voltage
remains at VO until the switch S1 is closed.
Then, at t = 0, S1 is closed, resulting in a finite step of magnitude V
being applied to a series RC circuit in which the capacitor has a voltage VO
across it. Let us now determine the capacitor voltage at t = 0
, just after the
step. From the element law of the capacitor (Equation 9.7), we know that an
instantaneous jump in capacitor voltage requires an infinite spike (that is, an
impulse) in current. Since a finite step voltage applied across a resistor cannot
support an infinite spike in current, we conclude that the capacitor voltage
cannot change instantaneously, rather it must be continuous. Thus, the voltage
across the capacitor at t = 0
+
must also be VO. This is our initial condition
on the capacitor. The voltage across the capacitor during the initial interval
(t ≤ 0
+
Final Interval (t (cid:5) 0) We next turn our attention to the final interval. To
determine the capacitor voltage in the final interval, observe that our situation
is identical to that of a DC source with voltage V applied across the series
combination of R and C as shown in Figure 10.11c. Since the capacitor current
is proportional to the rate of change of the capacitor voltage (Equation 9.7), in
a DC situation, where all transients have died out, the current flowing through
the capacitor must be zero. In other words, in a DC situation, the capacitor
voltage has attained some fixed value, and hence the capacitor current is zero.
Effectively, the capacitor behaves like an open circuit for DC sources. Since
no current is flowing, the drop across the resistor must be zero. Thus, to