A program solicitation was announced in 2011, and six companies were awarded contracts in July 2012. The six awardees who signed phase 1 contracts with DARPA included:
Boeing– system concept
Lockheed Martin – design utilizes a "tactical aircraft to provide a high energy-state, reusable first stage, enabling launches from bases worldwide"
Northrop Grumman
Space Information Laboratories – is "providing three key enabling technologies that could be used in multiple launch systems, including GPS Metric Track, Autonomous Flight Termination System (AFTS) and Space Based Range to reduce range launch cost."
Ventions – second stage launch vehicle
Virgin Galactic – utilizes its existing WhiteKnight2 carrier aircraft
In the first phase, Boeing, Lockheed Martin and Virgin Galactic were funded to explore different Alasa system concepts while Northrop Grumman, Space Information Laboratories and Ventions were contracted to work on enabling technologies that could be used by any or all of the system teams.
In December 2012, DARPA announced that the ALASA program would provide the launch vehicle booster for another DARPA program that is intending to release a "constellation of 24 micro-satellites (~20 kilograms (44 lb) range) each with 1-meter imaging resolution."
In May 2013, DARPA requested US$40 million for a second year of ALASA program funding in spring 2013.
In March 2014, Boeing won the large US$32–104 million phase 2 ALASA contract from DARPA. Boeing will use their F-15E Strike Eagle fighter to carry the ALASA rocket up to 12,000 m (39,000 ft), then release the 7.3 m (24 ft) rocket to ignite and carry itself into orbit. Using a modified fighter-jet to launch the rocket would increase satellite launch sites from four locations (Cape Canaveral Air Force Station, Florida; Vandenberg Air Force Base, California; Wallops Flight Facility, Virginia; and Kodiak Island, Alaska) to any available runway. The cost to put a 45 kg (99 lb) microsatellite into orbit is targeted at $1 million, a decrease of 66 percent. A demonstration launch was hoped for in FY 2015.
The F-15E launch vehicle would have required no modifications to launch the ALASA payload, not even software, because the rocket will use the same communications protocols as a typically mounted weapons system. This enables the aircraft to continue flying other missions as a cost benefit over being specialized. The rocket will also feature new design technologies to lower complexity and costs. It will be powered by a monopropellant, a combination of nitrous oxide and acetylene, and mixed together in one propellant tank slightly below room temperature; the propellant choice is a dramatic simplification of the complexity of the rocket vehicle. Rocket design is also unconventional, mounting the four engines for the first stage at the front rather than rear. DARPA plans to develop a second, smaller launch system called the Small Air Launch Vehicle to Orbit (SALVO) to understand operations cost, demonstrate new technologies like battery-powered pumps for the rocket’s engines, and provide overall program before ALASA is launched. SALVO was planned to launch in spring 2015, six to nine months before the first ALASA flight in late 2015. 12 flights were to be conducted through mid-2016 from Eglin Air Force Base, Florida over the Atlantic Ocean.
By June 2015, DARPA and the Air Force had reportedly began SALVO flights, potentially having already commenced them to counter Chinese and Russian electronic and infrared surveillance; this could mean ALASA would give the U.S. a "stealth satellite launch" capability.