In the table below, several flow quantities and parameters according to Airy wave theory are given. The given quantities are for a bit more general situation as for the solution given above. Firstly, the waves may propagate in an arbitrary horizontal direction in the x = (x,y) plane. The wavenumber vector is k, and is perpendicular to the cams of the wave crests. Secondly, allowance is made for a mean flow velocity U, in the horizontal direction and uniform over (independent of) depth z. This introduces a Doppler shift in the dispersion relations. At an Earth-fixed location, the observed angular frequency (or absolute angular frequency) is ω. On the other hand, in a frame of reference moving with the mean velocity U (so the mean velocity as observed from this reference frame is zero), the angular frequency is different. It is called the intrinsic angular frequency (or relative angular frequency), denoted as σ. So in pure wave motion, with U=0, both frequencies ω and σ are equal. The wave number k (and wavelength λ) are independent of the frame of reference, and have no Doppler shift (for monochromatic waves).
The table only gives the oscillatory parts of flow quantities – velocities, particle excursions and pressure – and not their mean value or drift. The oscillatory particle excursions ξx and ξz are the time integrals of the oscillatory flow velocities ux and uz respectively.
Water depth is classified into three regimes:
deep water – for a water depth larger than half the wavelength, h > ½ λ, the phase speed of the waves is hardly influenced by depth (this is the case for most wind waves on the sea and ocean surface),
shallow water – for a water depth smaller than the wavelength divided by 20, h < ​1⁄20 λ, the phase speed of the waves is only dependent on water depth, and no longer a function of period or wavelength; and
intermediate depth – all other cases, ​1⁄20 λ < h < ½ λ, where both water depth and period (or wavelength) have a significant influence on the solution of Airy wave theory.
In the limiting cases of deep and shallow water, simplifying approximations to the solution can be made. While for intermediate depth, the full formulations have to be used.