Maurice Allais states that the eclipse effect is related to a gravitational anomaly, that is inexplicable in the framework of the currently admitted theory of gravitation, without giving any explanation of his own. Allais's explanation for another anomaly (the lunisolar periodicity in variations of the azimuth of a pendulum) is that space evinces certain anisotropic characteristics, which he ascribes to motion through an aether which is partially entrained by planetary bodies.
His hypothesis leads to a speed of light dependent on the moving direction with respect to a terrestrial observer, since the Earth moves within the aether but the rotation of the Moon induces a "wind" of about 8 km/s. Thus Allais rejects Einstein's interpretation of the Michelson–Morley experiment and the subsequent verification experiments of Dayton Miller.
In particular, the Michelson–Morley experiment did not give a zero speed difference, but at most 8 km/s, without being able to detect any regularity. This difference was therefore interpreted as due to measurement uncertainties. Similarly, Miller's experiments corroborated these results over a long period of time, but Miller could not explain the source of the irregularities. At the time, temperature problems were invoked to explain the cause, as concluded by Robert S. Shankland. By re-analyzing the data from this experiment, Allais reported a periodicity using sidereal time rather than civil time used by Miller (daytime sidereal variation of the speed of light over a period of 23 hours 56 minutes with an amplitude of about 8 km/s).
Applying Titius–Bode law to the Earth-Moon system, which he generalizes to aether, Allais calculates a "wind" of 7.95 km/s, which is comparable to the values found by the experiments of Michelson and Miller. Hence Allais deduces that the aether turns with the stars as proposed by the aether drag hypothesis, and is not fixed as Lorentz thought when inventing his famous transformation and his ether theory. But the majority of scientists of the end of the nineteenth century imagining that such an aether crossed the Earth through, so that the rotation of the Earth around the Sun would cause an important variation of 30 km/s. Consequently, since the third postulate on which is based special relativity is the constancy of the speed of light in a vacuum, Allais considers it as unfounded. In order to measure a change in the speed of light, one would have to get back to the definition of the 1960 meter, since the confidence in the theory of relativity nowadays is such that current metrology uses constancy of the speed of light as an axiom.
Allais summarized his experimental work in English in his 1999 memoir on behalf of NASA. He detailed his aether hypothesis in the books L'Anisotropie de l'Espace published in 1997, and L'Effondrement de la Théorie de la Relativité published in 2004. A book on Allais's scientific legacy has been edited in English in 2011, yet his aether hypothesis has not gained significant traction amongst mainstream scientists. Nevertheless, after Allais's death in 2010, experiments on the Allais effect carry on.