The CEC decision was appealed against in two lawsuits, by those who submitted the draft law to CEC and by one of those who signed the draft law, both cases being launched in November, according to the general order of appeals against CEC decisions (before the administrative district court).
On December 11, 2012, a set of amendments to the law on legislative initiatives, adopted on November, 8, came into force. It provides the CEC with the competence to refuse gathering signatures on the grounds of draft law not conforming with the Constitution and provides for a special way of judicial review - such CEC refusals are appealed against before the Department of Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court and must be adjudicated during one month. The administrative district court transferred both cases to the Department of Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court.
On 11 February 2013, the Department of Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court has adopted a decision to adjourn the proceedings in the case and to request the Constitutional Court to evaluate whether the draft law conforms with the Constitution and Declaration of Independence. The decision was described as unexpected in the legal journal "Jurista vārds": the opinions of the experts invited by the journal have ranged from "The Senate's actions are well-grounded" to "haven't they mentioned that the Constitutional Court does not evaluate draft laws?".
On 20 February, the Department of Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court reconsidered its own decision and asked the Constitutional Court another question instead - whether the provisions of the amended law on legislative initiative, which give the competence to review the constitutionality of the draft laws to the CEC and the Supreme Court, conform with the Article 1 of the Constitution (the principle of separation of powers).
On 12 March, the Constitutional Court has launched proceedings on the application by the Department of Administrative Cases of the Supreme Court. On 18 December, the Constitutional Court decided that CEC's and the Supreme Court's competence is constitutional, provided that they only stop initiatives obviously contradicting the Constitution.
On 12 February 2014, the Supreme Court has delivered the judgment considering the CEC decision to be lawful.