The first to use an active anti-roll bar in 1994 was the Citroen Xantia Activa, a medium-sized sedan sold in Europe. The SC.CAR (Systeme Citroën de Contrôle Actif du Roulis) system featured an anti-roll bar that could be stiffened under the command of the suspension ECU during hard cornering. The car rolled a maximum of 2 degrees.
In 2001 the BMW 7 Series (E65) introduced Active Roll Stabilization (ARS) "active" anti-roll bars that can be proportionally controlled automatically by a suspension-control computer, reducing body lean in turns while improving rough-road ride quality.
In 2006 Toyota introduced its Active Stabilizer Suspension System. By altering stabilizer bar stiffness, this system acts to reduce body tilt during cornering, keeping the vehicle more level during turns and improving handling, as opposed to the natural tendency of a vehicle to roll due to the lateral forces experienced during high-speed maneuvering. The active stabilizer system relies on vehicle body sensors and electric motors. The first production usage of this system was introduced in August 2005 with the Lexus GS430 sport sedan
Porsche Panamera introduced the same system Porsche Dynamic Chassis Control (PDCC)  in 2009.
Mercedes-Benz M-Class#Third generation (W166: 2011–present) introduced a similar system: ACTIVE CURVE SYSTEM in 2011.
Range Rover Sport introduced Dynamic Response active anti-roll bars.
Mercedes-Benz S-Class Active Body Control system uses another approach: the computer uses sensors to detect lateral load, lateral force, and height difference in the suspension strut, then uses hydraulic pressure to raise or lower the spring to counter roll. This system removes the anti-roll bar. Most active roll control systems allow a small degree of roll to give a more natural feel.
Toyota also uses a mechanical system called Kinetic Dynamic Suspension System (KDSS) that essentially disengages the stabilizer bars when off-road, allowing for greater vehicle articulation and ride quality.