Not all jurisdictions have applied the rule uniformly, most often differing over exceptions for specific "sudden emergencies." There has been an increased interest in the ACDA codified as a universal standard of care that has been brought about by recent technological and social changes such as: event data recorders, dashcams, self-driving cars, safe cities and multi-use movements, and a movement to reduce claims by speeders against governments for "dangerous conditions" when operating speeds exceed a roads inferred design speed.
Collision liability has historically benefited the law profession by being cloaked as a mixture of fact and law, but with EDR's precisely preserving "a state of facts" often repeated with differing trial outcomes, collisions are less a question of fact, but of law. Electronic access to precise EDR data and rulings with new ideological modeling tools, can now expose judges as consistent political advocates for differing special road user interests. Furthermore, the law needs to be clear, precise, and uniform at a national level for the panoply of automobile manufacturers with the strict liability for their programming of law-abiding self-driving vehicles. It is foreseeable that two self-driving car makes can collide because their algorithm of the law letter is different; a resolvable issue that has been troubling human drivers for decades. The ACDA is a standard with descriptive mathematics, much of which are used in reverse by road engineers when designing or re-engineering roads to a speed criteria—for which its users were expected to follow.
In a trend epitomized by the Great American streetcar scandal, and accelerated by red scare hysteria, automobile interests became very powerful through the 1980s, even filing one-sided amicus curiae briefs to narrow precedent making it difficult for all prior types of users to exercise their easement to the roadways; its goal was towards making all roads controlled-access highways. In at least one jurisdiction, it could no longer be said "as a matter of law" whether a cyclist is a discernible object for which a motorist with proper lookout had a duty to see; an intolerant jury could fault a cyclist for "being in the way" notwithstanding that objects are less discernible and more "sudden" as one travels with reckless speed. Common law precedent was eroded through the creation of distinctions where none really exists (i.e. visibility of cyclist v.s. pedestrian v.s. warning triangle). These successes in-part contributed to mass congestion, smog, high fuel prices, and obesity, which waned the power of this lobby, and now green multi-modal transportation is Federally encouraged. The ACDA common law rule is more critical than ever to public safety in such multi-modal environment. A continued lack of such standard, or its effective enforcement by both police and judges may substantially diminish the legality of humans ever driving in the future.