As well as the above modes there are other modes, dependent on the manufacturer and model. Some examples include:
D5
In Hondas and Acuras equipped with five-speed automatic transmissions, this mode is used commonly for highway use (as stated in the manual), and uses all five forward gear ratios.
D4
This mode is also found in Honda and Acura four or five-speed automatics, and only uses the first four gear ratios. According to the manual, it is used for stop-and-go traffic, such as city driving.
D3 or 3
This mode is found in Honda, Acura, Volkswagen and Pontiac four-speed automatics and only uses the first three gear ratios. According to the manual, it is used for stop-and-go traffic, such as city driving.
D2 and D1
These modes are found on older Ford transmissions (C6, etc.). In D1, all three gears are used, whereas in D2 the car starts in second gear and upshifts to third.
S or Sport
This is commonly described as Sport mode. It operates in an identical manner as "D" mode, except that the upshifts change much higher up the engine's rev range. This has the effect on maximising all the available engine output, and therefore enhances the performance of the vehicle, particularly during acceleration. This mode will also downchange much higher up the rev range compared to "D" mode, maximising the effects of engine braking. This mode will have a detrimental effect on fuel economy. Hyundai has a Norm/Power switch next to the gearshift for this purpose on the Tiburon.
Some early GMs equipped with HYDRA-MATIC transmissions used (S) to indicate Second gear, being the same as the 2 position on a Chrysler, shifting between only first and second gears. This would have been recommended for use on steep grades, or slippery roads like dirt, or ice, and limited to speeds under 40 mph. (L) was used in some early GMs to indicate (L)ow gear, being the same as the 2 position on a Chrysler, locking the transmission into first gear. This would have been recommended for use on steep grades, or slippery roads like dirt, or ice, and limited to speeds under 15 mph.
+ −, and M
This is for the Manual mode selection of gears in certain automatics, such as Porsche and Honda's Tiptronic and BMW and Kia's Steptronic. The M feature can also be found in vehicles such as the Dodge Magnum and Journey; Pontiac G6; Mazda3, Mazda6, and CX-7; Toyota Camry, Corolla, Fortuner, Previa and Innova; Kia Forte (K3/Cerato), Optima (K5), Cadenza (K7) and K9 (Quoris). Mitsubishi montero sport / pajero sport and some Audi models (Audi TT) do not have the M, and instead have the + and -, which is separated from the rest of the shift modes; the same is true for some Peugeot products like the Peugeot 206. Meanwhile, the driver can shift up and down at will by toggling the (console mounted) shift lever similar to a semi-automatic transmission. This mode may be engaged either through a selector/position or by actually changing the gears (e.g., tipping the gear-down paddles mounted near the driver's fingers on the steering wheel).
Winter (W)
In some Volvo, Mercedes-Benz, BMW and General Motors models, a winter mode can be engaged so that second gear is selected instead of first when pulling away from stationary, to reduce the likelihood of loss of traction due to wheel spin on snow or ice. On GM cars, this was D2 in the 1950s, Second Gear Start after 1990, and Snow/Ice mode in the 2010s. On Ford, Kia, and Honda automatics, this feature can be accessed by moving the gear selector to 2 to start, then taking one's foot off the accelerator while selecting D once the vehicle is moving.
Brake (B)
A mode selectable on some Toyota models, as well as electric cars from several manufacturers. It can be used to decelerate, or maintain speed going downhill, without using the conventional brakes. In non-hybrid cars, B mode selects a lower gear to increase engine braking. GM called this "HR" ("hill retarder") and "GR" ("grade retarder") in the 1950s. In hybrids such as the Toyota Prius, which have a fixed gear ratio, B mode slows the car in part by increasing engine air intake, which enhances engine braking. In electric cars such as the Nissan Leaf and Mitsubishi i-MiEV, B mode increases the level of regenerative braking when the accelerator pedal is released.
Some automatic transmissions modified or designed specifically for drag racing may also incorporate a transbrake as part of a manual valve body. Activated by electrical solenoid control, a transbrake simultaneously engages the first and reverse gears, locking the transmission and preventing the input shaft from turning. This allows the driver of the car to raise the engine RPM against the resistance of the torque converter, then launch the car by simply releasing the transbrake switch.