In economics, Beckstrom's Law is a model or theorem formulated by Rod Beckstrom. It purports to answer "the decades-old question of 'how valuable is a network'", and states in summary that "The value of a network equals the net value added to each user’s transactions conducted through that network, summed over all users."
According to its creator, this law can be used to value any network be it social networks, computer networks, support groups and even the Internet as a whole. This new model values the network by looking from the edge of the network at all of the transactions conducted and the value added to each.
It states that one way to contemplate the value the network adds to each transaction is to imagine the network being shut off and what the additional transactions costs or loss would be. It can thus be compared to the value of a pizza delivery service offered to its customers. If the pizza delivery service shut down, then the social value generated by its deliveries declines, and people will either go hungry or elsewhere. Similarly, a potluck derives its total enjoyment value from the net value produced by each participant's dish. The success of such a gathering hinges on increasing the number of independent guests and their pots, thereby maximizing the amount of "luck" any one guest would have to achieve a satisfactory meal. Assuming one pot per person, a potluck with a set maximum number of guests could produce only a relatively small amount of total potential group satisfaction.
Beckstrom's Law differs from Metcalfe's law, Reed's law and other concepts that proposed that the value of a network was based purely on the size of the network, and in Metcalfe's law, one other variable.
According to Rod Beckstrom, the most significant improvement when using Beckstrom's Law instead of Metcalfe's Law, is the applicability to current experiences on the Internet. Metcalfe's Law does not account for service degradation due to a high number of users or bad actors who steal value from the network.