When braking, the rider in motion is seeking to change the speed of the combined mass m of rider plus bike. This is a negative acceleration a in the line of travel. F=ma, the acceleration a causes an inertial forward force F on mass m. The braking a is from an initial speed u to a final speed v, over a length of time t. The equation u - v = at implies that the greater the acceleration the shorter the time needed to change speed. The stopping distance s is also shortest when acceleration a is at the highest possible value compatible with road conditions: the equation s = ut + 1/2 at2 makes s low when a is high and t is low.
How much braking force to apply to each wheel depends both on ground conditions and on the balance of weight on the wheels at each instant in time. The total braking force cannot exceed the gravity force on the rider and bike times the coefficient of friction µ of the tire on the ground. mgµ >= Ff + Fr. A skid occurs if the ratio of either Ff over Nf or Fr over Nr is greater than µ, with a rear wheel skid having less of a negative impact on lateral stability.
When braking, the inertial force ma in the line of travel, not being co-linear with f, tends to rotate m about f. This tendency to rotate, an overturning moment, is resisted by a moment from mg.

Taking moments about the front wheel contact point at an instance in time:
When there is no braking, mass m is typically above the bottom bracket, about 2/3 of the way back between the front and rear wheels, with Nr thus greater than Nf.
In constant light braking, whether because an emergency stop is not required or because poor ground conditions prevent heavy braking, much weight still rests on the rear wheel, meaning that Nr is still large and Fr can contribute towards a.
As braking a increases, Nr and Fr decrease because the moment mah increases with a. At maximum constant a, clockwise and anti-clockwise moments are equal, at which point Nr = 0. Any greater Ff initiates a stoppie.

Other factors:
Downhill it is much easier to topple over the front wheel because the incline moves the line of mg closer to f. To try to reduce this tendency the rider can stand back on the pedals to try to keep m as far back as possible.
When braking is increasing the center of mass m may move forward relative to the front wheel, as the rider moves forward relative to the bike, and, if the bike has suspension on the front wheel, the front forks compress under load, changing the bike geometry. This all puts extra load on the front wheel.
At the end of a brake maneuver, as the rider comes to a halt, the suspension decompresses and pushes the rider back.
Values for µ vary greatly depending on a number of factors:
The material that the ground or road surface is made of.
Whether the ground is wet or dry.
The smoothness or roughness of the ground.
The firmness or looseness of the ground.
The speed of the vehicle, with friction reducing above 30 mph (50kph).
Whether friction is rolling or sliding, with sliding friction at least 10% below peak rolling friction.