In her feature integration theory, Treisman suggested that binding between features is mediated by the features' links to a common location. Psychophysical demonstrations of binding failures under conditions of full attention provide support for the idea that binding is accomplished through common location tags.
An implication of these approaches is that sensory data such as colour or motion may not normally exist in "unallocated" form. For Merker: "The 'red' of a red ball does not float disembodied in an abstract color space in V4." If colour information allocated to a point in the visual field is converted directly, via the instantiation of some form of propositional logic (analogous to that used in computer design) into colour information allocated to an "object identity" postulated by a top-down signal as suggested by Purves and Lotto, (e.g. There is blue here + Object 1 is here = Object 1 is blue) no special computational task of "binding together" by means such as synchrony may exist. (Although Von der Malsburg poses the problem in terms of binding "propositions" such as "triangle" and "top", these, in isolation, are not propositional.)
How signals in the brain come to have propositional content, or meaning, is a much larger issue. However, both Marr and Barlow suggested, on the basis of what was known about neural connectivity in the 1970s that the final integration of features into a percept would be expected to resemble the way words operate in sentences.
The role of synchrony in segregational binding remains controversial. Merker has recently suggested that synchrony may be a feature of areas of activation in the brain that relates to an "infrastructural" feature of the computational system analogous to increased oxygen demand indicated via MRI. Apparent specific correlations with segregational tasks may be explainable on the basis of interconnectivity of the areas involved. As a possible manifestation of a need to balance excitation and inhibition over time it might be expected to be associated with reciprocal re-entrant circuits as in the model of Seth et al. (Merker gives the analogy of the whistle from an audio amplifier receiving its own output.)
If it transpires that synchronized activity plays at most an infrastructural role in segregative computational "binding", the question arises as to whether we need another explanation. The implication both of Shadlen and Movshon's and of Merker's analyses seems to be that there may be no special binding problem in this sense. The problem may be merely an integral part of the more general problem of the computational logic used by neurons, or what is often referred to as the "neural code". In particular it may be inappropriate to analyse binding in perception without taking into account the way features are bound in memory, as addressed by Zimmer and colleagues, and how that informs the way the brain pre-conceives objects.