Upon impacting the ground, some translational kinetic energy can be converted to rotational kinetic energy and vice-versa depending on the ball's impact angle and angular velocity. If the ball moves horizontally at impact, friction will have a 'translational' component in the direction opposite to the ball's motion. In the figure, the ball is moving to the right, and thus it will have a translational component of friction pushing the ball to the left. Additionally, if the ball is spinning at impact, friction will have a 'rotational' component in the direction opposite to the ball's rotation. On the figure, the ball is spinning clockwise, and the point impacting the ground is moving to the left with respect to the ball's center of mass. The rotational component of friction is therefore pushing the ball to the right. Unlike the normal force and the force of gravity, these frictional forces will exert a torque on the ball, and change its angular velocity (ω).
Three situations can arise:
If a ball is propelled forward with backspin, the translational and rotational friction will act in the same directions. The ball's angular velocity will be reduced after impact, as will its horizontal velocity, and the ball is propelled upwards, possibly even exceeding its original height. It is also possible for the ball to start spinning in the opposite direction, and even bounce backwards.
If a ball is propelled forward with topspin, the translational and rotational friction act will act in opposite directions. What exactly happens depends on which of the two components dominate.
If the ball is spinning much more rapidly than it was moving, rotational friction will dominate. The ball's angular velocity will be reduced after impact, but its horizontal velocity will be increased. The ball will be propelled forward but will not exceed its original height, and will keep spinning in the same direction.
If the ball is moving much more rapidly than it was spinning, translational friction will dominate. The ball's angular velocity will be increased after impact, but its horizontal velocity will be decreased. The ball will not exceed its original height and will keep spinning in the same direction.

If the surface is inclined by some amount θ, the entire diagram would be rotated by θ, but the force of gravity would remain pointing downwards (forming an angle θ with the surface). Gravity would then have a component parallel to the surface, which would contribute to friction, and thus contribute to rotation.
In racquet sports such as table tennis or racquetball, skilled players will use spin (including sidespin) to suddenly alter the ball's direction when it impacts surface, such as the ground or their opponent's racquet.