A bullet is a component of firearm ammunition and is the projectile expelled from the firearm's barrel. The term is from Middle French and originated as the diminutive of the word boulle (boullet), which means "small ball". Bullets are made of a variety of materials such as copper, lead, steel, polymer, rubber and even wax. They are available either singly as in muzzleloading and cap and ball firearms, or as a component of paper cartridges and much more commonly metallic cartridges. Bullets are made in a large number of shapes and constructions depending on the intended applications, including specialized functions such as hunting, target shooting, training and combat.
Though the word "bullet" is often used incorrectly in colloquial language to refer to a cartridge, a bullet is not a cartridge but rather a component of one. A cartridge is a combination package of the bullet, casing, propellant and primer. This use of the term "bullet" when "cartridge" is intended in a conversation, leads to confusion when the components of a cartridge are discussed or intended.
Bullet sizes are expressed by their weight and diameter (referred to as "caliber") in both imperial and metric measurement systems. For example: 55 grain .223 caliber bullets are of the same weight and caliber as 3.56 gram 5.56mm caliber bullets.
The bullets used in many cartridges are fired at a muzzle velocities faster than the speed of sound — about 343 metres per second (1,130 ft/s) in dry air at 20 °C (68 °F) — and thus can travel a substantial distance to a target before a nearby observer hears the "bang" of the shot. The sound of gunfire (i.e. the muzzle report) is often accompanied with a loud bullwhip-like crack as the supersonic bullet pierces through the air creating a sonic boom. Bullet speed at various stages of flight depends on intrinsic factors such as its sectional density, aerodynamic profile and ballistic coefficient, and extrinsic factors such as barometric pressure, humidity, air temperature and wind speed. Subsonic cartridges fire bullets slower than the speed of sound so there is no sonic "crack". This means that a subsonic cartridge such as .45 ACP can be substantially quieter than a supersonic cartridge such as the .223 Remington, even without the use of a suppressor.
Bullets do not normally contain explosives, but damage the intended target by transferring kinetic energy upon impact and penetration (see terminal ballistics).