The added weight of the butter has no effect on the falling process, since the butter spreads throughout the slice.

The mass of butter added to toast ( ~4g ) is small compared to the mass of the typical slice of toast (~35g), is spread thinly, and passes into the body of the toast. Its contribution to the total movement of inertia of the toast and rotational dynamics, thus its effect on the toast is negligible.

The following findings are from Mythbusters:
Period of Rotation: If you were to drop a piece of toast from your kitchen table, it will rotate as it falls. The period of rotation is the time it takes for the toast to complete a full 360 degree spin. The problem is that the floor interrupts the fall right in the middle of the toast’s rotation—this will cause the toast to go from butter-side-up to butter-side-down. The higher the point at which the toast is dropped, the greater the chance for it to complete a rotation—and land butter-side-up. Though we can’t recommend standing on your breakfast table, it’s a practice that could greatly improve your chances of salvaging your dropped toast.
Moment of Inertia: At the moment a piece of toast begins flipping towards the kitchen floor, it has inertia—it doesn’t want to stop flipping if it doesn’t have to. Its moment of inertia is determined by the speed at which the toast is flipping, combined with the size and mass of the toast. Most breakfast toast is about the same size and mass, unless you’re in Texas—home of the giant slices that carry the state name. But any way you slice it, the same rules apply. Add a little velocity to the spin as your breakfast goes sliding off your plate—give it a smack to add some inertia and see how it lands.
Angular Momentum: Just like a frisbee or a gyroscope, your toast gains stability when it spins. In fact, the faster it spins, the more stable it gets. This is angular momentum, or mass in motion around a single point, in action. Newton once claimed that a mass in motion likes to stay that way, and this is definitely true for toast. Once your toast is spinning, it wants to keep spinning—that is, until some other force acts on it…like the floor.