Part 702 of the NCUA Rules and Regulations sets forth the statutory net worth categories, and risk-based net worth requirements for federally insured credit unions. References are made in this Letter to the five net worth categories which are: "well capitalized," "adequately capitalized", "undercapitalized," "significantly undercapitalized," and "critically undercapitalized."
Credit unions that are less than "adequately capitalized" must operate under an approved net worth restoration plan. Examiners evaluate capital adequacy by assessing progress toward goals set forth in the plan.
Determining the adequacy of a credit union's capital begins with a qualitative evaluation of critical variables that directly bear on the institution's overall financial condition. Included in the assessment of capital is the examiners opinion of the strength of the credit union's capital position over the next year or several years based on the credit union's plan and underlying assumptions. Capital is a critical element in the credit union's risk management program. The examiner assesses the degree to which credit, interest rate, liquidity, transaction, compliance, strategic, and reputation risks may impact on the credit union's current and future capital position. The examiner also considers the interrelationships with the other areas:
Capital level and trend analysis;
Compliance with risk-based net worth requirements;
Composition of capital;
Interest and dividend policies and practices;
Adequacy of the Allowance for Loan and Lease Losses account;
Quality, type, liquidity and diversification of assets, with particular reference to classified assets;
Loan and investment concentrations;
Growth plans;
Volume and risk characteristics of new business initiatives;
Ability of management to control and monitor risk, including credit and interest rate risk;
Earnings. Good historical and current earnings performance enables a credit union to fund its growth, remain competitive, and maintain a strong capital position;
Liquidity and funds management;
Extent of contingent liabilities and existence of pending litigation;
Field of membership; and
Economic environment.