Just as the electrostatic force, the frictional force scales quadratically with size F ~ L2.
Friction is an ever plaguing problem regardless of the scale of a device. It becomes all the more prominent when a device is scaled down. In the nano scale it can wreak havoc if not accounted for because the parts of a Nano-Electro-Mechanical-Systems (NEMS) device are sometimes only a few atoms thick. Furthermore, such NEMS devices typically have a very large surface area-to-volume ratio. Surfaces in the nanoscale resemble a mountain range, where each peak corresponds to an atom or a molecule. Friction at the nanoscale is proportional to the number of atoms that interact between two surfaces. Hence, friction between perfectly smooth surfaces in the macroscale is actually similar to large rough objects rubbing against each other.
In the case of nanotube nanomotors however, the intershell friction in the multi-walled nanotubes (MWNT) is remarkably small. Molecular dynamics studies show that, with the exception of small peaks, the frictional force remains almost negligible for all sliding velocities until a special sliding velocity is reached. Simulations relating the sliding velocity, induced rotation, inter-shell frictional force to the applied force provide explanations for the low inter-wall friction. Contrary to macroscale expectations the speed at which an inner tube travels within an outer tube does not follow a linear relationship with the applied force. Instead, the speed remains constant (as in a plateau) despite increasing applied force occasionally jumping in value to the next plateau. No real rotation is noticed in nonchiral inner tubes. In the case of chiral tubes a true rotation is noticed and the angular velocity also jumps to plateaus along with the jumps in the linear velocity. These plateaus and jumps can be explained as a natural outcome of frictional peaks for growing velocity, the stable (rising) side of the peak leading to a plateau, the dropping (unstable) side leading to a jump. These peaks occur due to parametric excitation of vibrational modes in the walls of the tubes due to the sliding of the inner tube. With the exception of small peaks, that correspond to the speed plateaus, the frictional force remains almost negligible for all sliding velocities until a special sliding velocity. These velocity plateaus correspond to the peaks in the frictional force. The sudden rise in sliding velocity is due to a resonance condition between a frequency that is dependent on the inter-tube corrugation period and particular phonon frequencies of the outer tube which happen to possess a group velocity approximately equal to the sliding velocity.