The new type of underground freight infrastructure will be complementary to the Swiss road and rail network, and relieve it at critical points. The first scheduled section of about 66.7 kilometres (41.4 mi) in the central Swiss Plateau (Mittelland) will connect H채rkingen/Niederbipp and the city of Z체rich from the early 2030s. Later, a comprehensive network is planned between the Bodensee in eastern Switzerland and Lake Geneva in western Switzerland, with offshoots to Basel and Luzern.
The tunnels will be built at a depth of up to 50 metres (164 ft) and have a diameter of 6 metres (20 ft). In these tubes, three tracks will be placed, one in each direction plus a service lane in the middle, operating fully automated and unmanned vehicles which can transport two EUR-pallets and containers. Via ramps or lifts, these small vehicles, powered by electromagnetic induction, will load and unload automatically. The initiators believe that the vehicles will be able to travel round the clock and round the year at a speed of 30 kilometres per hour (18.6 mph). An additional monorail system for packages, suspended in the crown of the tunnel, may run at twice that speed.
On 20 April 2016 the government of the Canton of Z체rich announced that it had reservations, because it was still unclear whether CST would relieve congestion in the most important cantonal municipalities. In principle, the government welcomes the swap of goods to a separate mode of transport. According to the current level of knowledge it is questionable whether CST will benefit even the largest towns, since the traffic reduction would largely be on the interurban routes, while local road or rail distribution would increase traffic around the hubs. The government therefore asked the providers to clarify this aspect.
The main shareholders Migros, Coop, Swisscom, Swiss Post, Credit Suisse, Z체rcher Kantonalbank, Mobiliar and Helvetia as well as the foreign partners Dagong Global Investment Group from China and Meridiam from France will contribute 100 million Swiss francs; the Swiss federal authorities have to ensure the legal framework for the project, the Executive Board announced at a media conference on 23 January 2018.