With the introduction of the Space Shuttle, NASA and the Air Force needed an upper stage to boost payloads out of low Earth orbit. A new version of Centaur, the Centaur-G, was developed, with both Challenger and Discovery modified to carry the stage. Centaur-G was optimized for installation in the Orbiter payload bay by increasing the hydrogen tank diameter to 14 feet while retaining the 10-foot-diameter (3.0 m) oxygen tank. Its initial mission, scheduled for May 16, 1986, was to boost the Galileo probe to Jupiter, then, just six days later, the Ulysses probe. Ulysses would also be boosted to Jupiter in order to use the planet's gravity to reach a highly inclined solar orbit to allow observation of the Sun's polar regions. A shortened version of the Centaur-G was also planned for use on shuttle missions involving Department of Defense payloads and was to be used for launching the Magellan probe to Venus.
During the developmental phase of the Shuttle in the 1970s, NASA debated the use of the solid-fueled IUS or the Centaur. The IUS was much lighter-weight and safer than Centaur, which carried many serious safety risks. On the downside, there was concern that the rough starting and extremely fast acceleration of a solid rocket motor could damage the payload, and it could not be turned off once ignited, plus it would not have as much thrust as Centaur, which meant that less complex payloads could be carried. The idea of carrying several tons of volatile liquid hydrogen and oxygen on board a Shuttle was not an appealing idea either, especially because Centaur had never been designed as a man-rated vehicle and lacked the extra safety features of the Shuttle or the Saturn upper stages. Especially concerning was what to do in the event of an emergency or an aborted Shuttle launch. If a Shuttle had to make an emergency landing, the weight of the Centaur would be more than the orbiter's landing gear was designed to handle, nor was there a reliable, safe way to dump its propellants overboard during an emergency landing. On the other hand, Centaur's reliability in recent years had been excellent. When the first Shuttle flight was made in April 1981, there had been just two Centaur failures in 35 launches over the past decade (discounting two Atlas-Centaurs had been destroyed early in flight before the Centaur got a chance to operate). Still, several astronauts were wary about flying with a Centaur in the Shuttle's payload bay, and a few flat-out refused to do it.
In the end, NASA approved Shuttle-Centaur with some hesitation, as the greater performance and smoother engine start over the IUS was too tempting to resist and in addition, the Air Force had plans for classified military Shuttle missions launching satellites that would need Centaur's extra power. Also, the only other option for planetary missions was Titan-Centaur, which ran into the difficulty of that launch vehicle being controlled by the Air Force, and two decades of history had proven the bad blood that resulted when NASA and the Air Force had to share a launch vehicle.
The Centaur, as carried in the Shuttle payload bay, required a complex airborne support system, the Centaur Integrated Support System (CISS). The CISS controlled Centaur pressurization in flight and enabled Centaur's cryogenic propellants to be dumped overboard quickly in the event of an abort. Shuttle-Centaur flights would have run the Shuttle's main engines at 109%, higher than the typical 104%, and the Shuttle would have had to orbit at its lowest possible altitude.
After the Challenger accident, just months before Shuttle-Centaur was scheduled to fly, NASA realized that it was far too risky to fly the Centaur on the Shuttle. Galileo, Ulysses, and Magellan would all eventually be boosted by the much less powerful solid-fueled Inertial Upper Stage, with Galileo requiring multiple gravitational assists from Venus and Earth to reach Jupiter.