TCP/IP) for the communication of multimedia data. The
different media types exchanged by these applications have
signiﬁcantly different trafﬁc requirements—such as band-
width, delay,
jitter, and reliability—from the traditional
textual data and demand different constraints or service guar-
antees from the underlying communication network to deliver
an acceptable performance. In networking terminology, such
performance guarantees are referred to as quality of service
(QoS) guarantees that can be provided only by suitable en-
hancements to the basic Internet service model (Kurose and
Ross, 2001). Circuit-switched networks,
like the telephony
system or plain old telephone service (POTS), have been
designed from the ground up to support such QoS guarantees.
However, this approach suffers from many shortcomings like
scalability, resource wastage, high complexity, and high over-
head (Leon-Garcia and Widjaja, 2000). Another approach,
known as the asynchronous transfer mode (ATM), relies on
cell switching to form virtual circuits that provide some of the
QoS guarantees of
traditional circuit-switched networks.
Although ATM has become very popular as the backbone of
high bandwidth and local networks, it has not been widely
accepted as a substitute for the protocol stack used on the
Internet. Providing QoS in packet-switched Internet, without
completely sacriﬁcing the gain of statistical multiplexing, has
been a major challenge of multimedia networking. In addition
to the QoS guarantees, distributed multimedia applications
also demand many functional requirements—such as support
for multicasting, security, session management, and mobil-
ity—for effective operation, and these can be provided by
introducing new protocols residing above the traditional
protocol stack used on the Internet (Wolf et al., 1997). In
this chapter, we discuss two popular protocol architectures,
H.323 (Thom, 1996; Liu and Mouchtaris, 2000) and SIP
(Johnston, 2000; Schulzrinne and Rosenburg, 2000) that have
been speciﬁcally designed to support distributed multimedia
applications.