The forward scattered ﬁeld measured along the line T per-
pendicular to ^ii can be expressed as the integral of the product
of the Green’s function, incident ﬁeld and the dielectric constant
of the object. Taking the one-dimensional Fourier transform of
the scattered ﬁeld along the line perpendicular to ^ii, one sees that
the transformed ﬁeld is related to the values of the two-dimen-
sional Fourier transform of the dielectric constant contrast
evaluated on a semicircle. The orientation of the semicircle
depends on the incident direction ^ii, and its radius is fre-
quency-dependent. Note that this semicircle corresponds to
the slice for the conventional X-ray CT. If we change the direc-
tion of the incident wave (and hence the corresponding
direction of receiving line) over all aspect angles and/or vary
the frequency of the incident wave, sufﬁcient transformed data
will be available in the two-dimensional spatial frequency
domain. After proper interpolation of the data to ﬁt the rect-
angular coordinates, one can take the two-dimensional inverse
Fourier transform (by FFT) to obtain the reconstructed dielec-
tric constant distribution. This is the basic principle of the
forward-type diffraction tomography. For the reﬂection-type,
one can measure the back scattered ﬁeld along the line perpen-
dicular to ^ii and perform similar processes (except that the
transformed data are now on another semicircle away from
the origin). This discussion is based on the Born approximation
that holds only for the case of very weak inhomogeneity of
the dielectric object. However, one can enlarge the range of
inhomogeneity a little further such that the Rytov approxima-
tion is valid. By properly deﬁning the measured quantity
(taking the logarithm of the total ﬁeld divided by the incident
ﬁeld), it can be shown that all the aforementioned processes are
still valid. Therefore, the diffraction tomography can be applied
to a larger range of inhomogeneity of the dielectric object as
long as the Rytov approximation is satisﬁed. Note that the idea
of diffraction tomography can also be applied to inverse scat-
tering of the conducting object. Under the physical optics
approximation, the scattered ﬁeld can be approximately ex-
pressed as a linear function of a properly deﬁned shape function
of the object. Therefore, the one-dimensional Fourier transform
of the scattered ﬁeld will be related to the values of the two-
dimensional Fourier transform of the shape function evaluated
on a semicircle. This is indeed the basic scheme of the diffrac-
tion tomography. However, the shape function deﬁned here is