the cladding is not necessary for the purpose of waveguiding,
since the permittivity of the air is smaller than the permittivity
of the ﬁber, it avoids scattering by the supporting structure of
the ﬁber because the ﬁeld decays exponentially outside the core,
hence, it is very small outside the cladding. Moreover, the
cladding allows a single-mode propagation for a larger value
of the radius of the core than permitted in the absence of it. A
common approach to simplify the analysis of this type of
structure is to consider the cladding region to extend to inﬁnity,
having relative dielectric constant equal to one (air). From the
application of Maxwell’s equations to the problem illustrated, it
turns out that TE and TM modes are not supported by this
structure because there is no metal to separate the core from the
outside dielectric. It is important to identify two modes for the
structure, the ones inside the rod (r < a) and the ones outside
the rod (r > a). For this structure to act as a waveguide, the
ﬁelds outside the rod must vanish and exhibit a decay in the
radial direction. The diameter of the rod in this structure is very
important: an increase in the diameter reduces the attenuation
of the ﬁeld inside the rod, increases the distance to which the
ﬁelds outside the rod extend, while producing a propagation
constant slightly higher to the one of free space. The ﬁeld
distribution inside a dielectric waveguide is a combination of
TE (or H) and TM (or E) modes. One way to designate hybrid
modes is to denote them as HE when the TE modes predomi-
nate or EH when TM modes predominate. Pure TE or TM
modes exhibit cutoff frequencies below which attenuating
modes cannot propagate. The cutoff frequency is determined
by the minimum electrical radius (a=l) of the rod. For small
values of a=l, the modes cannot propagate unattenuated in the
rod. There is, however, one hybrid mode called the HE11 that
does not have a cutoff frequency. This mode is called the
dominant mode or dipole mode because it is used in end-ﬁre
antennas. The ﬁeld components of the modes in the internal rod
are given in these equations: