Relevance Feedback
The problem of content-based image retrieval is different than
the conventional computer vision-based pattern recognition
task. The fundamental difference between the two is that in
the latter, we are looking for exact match for the object to be
searched with as small and as accurate a retrieved list as
possible. But in the former, the goal is to extract as many
‘‘similar’’ objects as possible, the notion of similarity being
very loose as compared to the notion of exact match. Moreover,
the human user is the indispensable part in the former. Early
literature and CBIR systems emphasized fully automatic oper-
ation. This approach did not take into account the fact that the
ultimate end user of the CBIR system is human, and the image
is inherently a subjective medium (i.e., the perception of image
content is very subjective, and the same content can be inter-
preted differently by users having different search criteria). This
human perception subjectivity has different levels to it: one
user might be more interested in a different dominant feature
of the image than the other, or two users might be interested in
the same feature (e.g., texture), but the perception of a speciﬁc
texture might be different for the two users. Recent drive is
oriented more toward how humans perceive image content and
how to integrate such a ‘‘human model’’ into the image re-
trieval systems. Rui et al. (1998) have reported a formal model
of a CBIR system with relevance feedback integrated into it.
They ﬁrst initialized a retrieval system with uniformly distrib-
uted weights for each feature. Then user’s information need is
distributed among all the features. The similarity is then com-
puted on the basis of weights by user’s input, and retrieval
results are displayed to the user. The user marks each retrieved
result as highly relevant, relevant, no-opinion, irrelevant, and
highly irrelevant according to his or her information needs
and perception subjectivity. The system updates its weights and
goes back into the loop.