QBIC is the ﬁrst commercial content-based image retrieval
system. Developed by IBM Almaden Research Centre, it is an
open framework technology that can be used for both static
and dynamic image retrieval. QBIC has undergone several
iterations since it was ﬁrst reported (Niblack et al., 1998).
QBIC allows users to graphically pose and reﬁne queries
based on multiple visual properties, including color, shape,
and texture. QBIC supports several query types: simple, multi-
feature, and multipass. A simple query involves only one
feature. For example, identifying images that have a color
distribution similar to the query image can involve a complex
query with more than one feature, which can take the form of a
multifeature or a multi-pass query. For identifying images that
have similar color and texture features, a multifeature query
would be possible and involve the system searching through
the different types of feature data in the database to identify
similar images. All feature classes would have equal weightings
during the search, and all feature tables would be searched in
parallel. In contrast, with a multipass query, the output of an
initial search would be used as the basis for the next search.
The system would reorganize the search results from a previ-
ous pass based on the ‘‘feature distances’’ in the current pass.
For example, a user could identify images that have a similar
color distribution and then reorder the results based on color
composition. With multifeature and multipass queries, users
can weight features to specify their relative importance. QBIC
technology has been incorporated into several IBM software
products, including DB2 Image Extender and Digital Library.
QBIC supports several matching features,
including color,
shape, and texture. The global color function computes the
average RGB colors in the entire image for both the dominant
color and the variation of color throughout the entire image.
Similarity is based on the three average color values. The local
color function computes the color distribution for both the
dominant color and the variation for each image in a predeter-
mined 256 color space. Image similarity is based on the simi-
larity of the color distribution. The shape function analyzes
images for combinations of area, circularity, eccentricity, and
major axis orientation. All shapes are assumed to be nonoc-
cluded planar shapes, allowing each shape to be represented as
a binary image. The texture function analyzes areas for global
coarseness, contrast, and directionality features.