We must ﬁnally come to terms with the apparent contradic-
tion between the need for zeros in the model and the desire to
avoid them. Indeed, R(z) itself is composed of a single zero and
no poles. Some of the early writings on this subject argued that
if equation 3.2 is a good model for the glottal dynamics, then
one of the poles of G(z) will approximately cancel the zero zo
in R(z). This does not, however, resolve the question of
whether G(z) should contain zeros, or whether, in certain
cases, T(z) should include zeros to appropriately model a
phoneme. The answer to these questions depends largely on
what aspect of speech we are trying to model. In most applica-
tions, correct spectral magnitude information is all that is
required of the model. Generally speaking, this is because the
human auditory system is ‘‘phase deaf ’’ (Milner, 1970), so
information gleaned from the speech is extracted from its
magnitude spectrum. While a detailed discussion is beyond
our current scope (Deller et al., 2000), the critical fact that
justiﬁes the all-pole model is that a magnitude (but not a
phase) spectrum for any rational system function can be mod-
eled to an arbitrary degree of accuracy with a sufﬁcient
number of stable poles. Therefore, the all-pole model can
exactly preserve the magnitude spectral dynamics (the ‘‘infor-
mation’’) in the speech but might not retain the phase charac-
teristics. In fact, for the speech model to be stable and all pole,
it must necessarily have a minimum phase spectrum, regardless
of the true characteristics of the signal being encoded. Ideally,
the all-pole model will have the correct magnitude spectrum
but minimum phase characteristic with respect to the ‘‘true’’
model. If the objective is to code, store, resynthesize, and
perform other such tasks on the magnitude spectral character-
istics but not necessarily on the temporal dynamics, the all-
pole model is perfectly adequate. One should not, however,
anticipate that the all-pole model can preserve time-domain
features of speech waveforms because such features depend
explicitly on the phase spectrum.