and 240–250% in zone 3. This protection is selected by locat-
ing a relay at a given line terminal and determining the length
corresponding to the relay coverage as a percentage of the line
length between the relay terminal and adjacent relay terminals.
When doing this, the selected direction is down the transmis-
sion line starting from the terminal where the relay is located.
The length of the transmission line originating from the loca-
tion of the relay and ending at the next terminal is assumed to
be 100%. The meaning of 120% is that the entire transmission
line is covered as well as the additional 20% of the line origi-
nating from the adjacent terminal. The times of operation
associated with zones are different: zone 1 operation is instan-
taneous, zone 2 is delayed to allow zone 1 relays to operate
ﬁrst, and zone 3 times allow the corresponding relays closer to
the fault to operate ﬁrst in either the zone 1 or zone 2. With
this time-step approach selected for different zones of protec-
tion, the relays closest to the fault are allowed to operate ﬁrst. If
they fail to operate, the relays located at the remote terminals,
that ‘‘see’’ the same fault in zone 2, will still disconnect the
failed component. If zone 2 relay operation fails, relays located
further away from the faulted line will operate next with the
zone 3 settings. The advantage of this approach is a redundant
coverage of each line section. They are also covered with
multiple relay zones of the relay located on the adjacent lines,
ensuring that
the faulted component will be eventually
removed even if the relay closest to the fault fails. The disad-
vantage is that each time a backup relay operates, a larger
section of the system is removed from service because the
relays operating in zone 2 (sometimes) or zone 3 (always) are
connected to the circuit breakers that are remote from the ends
of the transmission line experiencing the fault. In addition, the
time to remove faulted sections from service increases as the