Today’s MOSFET has evolved through many modiﬁcations to
provide solutions for parasitic problems that emerge during
scaling. A modern n-channel MOSFET structure is shown in
Figure 3.18. The gate dielectric is SiO2 and is grown by thermal
oxidation. As a result of continued scaling, the gate oxide has
thinned down to the extent that direct tunneling has become a
serious concern. Currently, alternate high-k dielectrics are
being considered as replacements for SiO2. The goal is to
achieve higher capacitance without compromising gate leak-
age. The standard gate electrode is heavily doped polysilicon
deﬁned by anisotropic reactive ion etching. Extension junc-
tions are formed by ion-implantation using the polysilicon
gate as an implant mask. Because a separate masking step is
not needed to deﬁne the junction regions, the approach is
named self-aligned polysilicon gate technology. At the same
time, the junction sheet resistance must be sufﬁciently low not
to increase the device series resistance. Extension junctions
must be as shallow as possible to reduce DIBL. When formed
by ion-implantation, shallow junctions require low doses and
low energies. Unfortunately, low dose results in higher series
resistance. Sidewall spacers are formed by deposition of a
dielectric (SiO2 or Si3N4) followed by anisotropic reactive
ion etching. The spacers must be as thin as possible to min-
imize the series resistance contribution of
the extension
junctions. Deep source and drain junctions are formed by
ion-implantation following spacer formation. Because they
are separated from the channel by the spacers, their contribu-
tion to DIBL is negligible. These junctions must be sufﬁciently
deep to allow formation of good quality silicide contacts. Both
Ti and Co silicides are used as source/drain contact materials.
Silicides are formed by an approach referred to as self-aligned-
silicide (SALICIDE), which selectively forms the silicide on the
junctions as well as polysilicon. Silicide formation consumes
the Si substrate in the deep source/drain regions and can lead
to excessive junction leakage. To avoid this, the deep source/
drain regions are required to be about 50 nm deeper than the