Segmentation
Most of the existing techniques in current CBIR systems
depend heavily on a low-level feature-based description of
image content. Most existing approaches represent images
based only on their composition with little regard to spatial
organization of the low-level features. On the other hand, users
of the CBIR systems often would like to ﬁnd images containing
particular objects (‘‘things’’). This gap between low-level de-
scription of the image content and the object images represent
can be ﬁlled by performing segmentation on images to be
indexed. Segmentation subdivides an image into its constitu-
ent parts or objects. Segmentation algorithms for mono-
chrome images generally are based on one of two basic
properties of gray-level values: discontinuity and similarity.
In the ﬁrst category, the approach is to partition an image
based on abrupt changes in gray level. The principal areas of
interest in this category are detection of isolated points and
detection of lines and edges in an image. The principal ap-
proaches in the second category are based on thresholding,
region growing, and region splitting and merging. The Blob-
World system proposed by Carson et al. (1997) is based on
segmentation using the expectation–maximization algorithm
on combined color and texture features. It represents the
image as a small set of localized coherent regions in color
and texture spaces. After segmenting the image into small
regions, a description of each region’s color, texture, and
spatial characteristics is produced. Each image may be visual-
ized by an ensemble of 2-D ellipses or ‘‘blobs,’’ each of which
possesses a number of attributes. The number of blobs in an
image is not very overwhelming to facilitate fast image retrieval
applications and is typically less than ten. Each blob represents
a region on the image that is roughly homogeneous with
respect to color or texture. A blob is described by its dominant
color, mean texture descriptors, spatial centroid, and scatter
matrix. The exact retrieval process is then performed on the