differential-difference equations in the block form. A linear
transformation for distributed time-delay systems is proposed
in Zheng et al. (1995), and the developed SMC algorithm is
applied to liquid propellent rocket motors. In Hu et al. (1998),
a transformation for systems with delay only in the control is
used to design a sliding-mode controller for the transformed
systems; the advantages over state feedback control are given.
Sufﬁcient conditions for sliding-mode control of systems with
uncertain, continuously differentiable, and bounded time delay
in the states are given in Sinha et al. (1997), using an in-
variant cone of positive initial functions. Finally, we note that
El-Khazali (1998) proposes an output feedback sliding-mode
control design method for similar uncertain time-delay systems.
With respect to the second area, discrete-time systems, it is
well-known that ‘‘chattering’’ or oscillation problems occur at
the boundary layer when the controls are implemented by
digital computers at a given sampling frequency (Furuta,
1990). For this reason, researchers have been investigating the
development of discrete sliding-mode control (DSMC) for
more than 10 years; see, for example, the works of Furuta
(1990), Sira-Ramirez (1991), Spurgeon (1991), and Kaynak
and Denker (1993). One particular direction of research along
these lines has been toward the coupling of adaptation with
DSMC, primarily because the discrete sliding-mode control
might not exist in the presence of system parameter uncertain-
ties or external disturbances; this, in fact, is one of the main
differences between DSMC and continuous sliding-mode con-
trol. There have appeared several good works on adaptive
DSMC for linear time-invariant systems. For example, Chan
(1997) proposes a nonswitching type of adaptive DSMC design
method for a minimum-phase plant in the input/output form
with bounded disturbances, whereas Furuta suggests using a
switching type control law (Furuta, 1993). Both of these works
prove that the state trajectories will converge to a small neigh-
borhood of the deﬁned sliding surface in ﬁnite time. Bartolini
et al. (1995) combined adaptive control with sliding-mode
control for discrete linear systems in state-space forms.