Texture
An image can be considered as a mosaic of regions with
different appearances, and the image features associated with
these regions can be used for search and retrieval. Although no
formal deﬁnition of texture exists, intuitively this descriptor
provides measures of properties such as smoothness, coarse-
ness, and regularity. These properties can generally not be
attributed to the presence of any particular color or intensity.
Texture corresponds to repetition of basic texture elements
called texels. A texel consists of several pixels and can be
periodic, quasiperiodic, or random in nature. Texture is an
innate property of virtually all surfaces, including such ele-
ments as clouds, trees, bricks, hair, and fabric. It contains
important information about the structural arrangement of
surfaces and their relationship to the surrounding environ-
ment. The three principal approaches used in practice to
describe the texture of a region are statistical, structural, and
spectral. Statistical approaches yield characterization of tex-
tures as smooth, coarse, grainy, and so on. Structural tech-
niques deal with the arrangement of image primitives, such as
description of texture based on regularly spaced parallel lines.
Spectral techniques are based on properties of Fourier spec-
trum and are used primarily to detect global periodicity in an
image by identifying high-energy, narrow peaks in the spec-
trum (Gonzalez, 1992) Haralick et al. (1973) proposed the
co-occurrence matrix representation of texture feature. This
method of texture description is based on the repeated occur-
rence of some gray-level conﬁguration in the texture; this
conﬁguration varies rapidly with distance in ﬁne textures
and slowly in coarse textures. This approach explores the
gray-level spatial dependence of texture. It ﬁrst constructs a
co-occurrence matrix based on the orientation and distance
between image pixels and then extracts meaningful statistics
from the matrix as texture representation. Motivated by the
psychological studies in human visual perception of texture,
Tamura et al. (1978) have proposed the texture representation
from a different angle. They developed computational ap-
proximations to the visual texture properties found to be
important in psychology studies. The six visual texture prop-
erties are coarseness, contrast, directionality, linelikeness,
regularity, and roughness. One major distinction between
the Tamura texture representation and co-occurrence matrix
representation is that all the texture properties in Tamura
representation are visually meaningful, whereas some of the