Intellisuite is another integrated software system that assists
designers in optimizing MEMS devices by providing the
needed manufacturing databases, allowing them to model
the entire device manufacturing sequence, and to simulate
the behavior without having to enter a manufacturing facility
(http://www.corningintellisense.com). The system can be used
to predict the behavior of complex structures to within a 10%
accuracy by utilizing fully coupled thermoelectromechanical
analysis. Intellisuite incorporates three extensive material,
design, and fabrication databases from respected sources.
These databases are integrated, and users can easily add
custom information to any of them. Intellisuite uses a process
sequence builder to emulate the actual process steps that go
into building a device in a fabrication facility. For example,
the steps in a typical MEMS process (e.g., laying down the
silicon substrate, cleaning, deposition, mask layout, implan-
tation, and etching) are incorporated in the software data-
base. Once the user inputs the process sequence or uses a
process template, an expert system process checker debugs the
process to ensure completeness and continuity of the deﬁned
steps. A solid modeler will then create a three-dimensional
structure upon combining the fabrication information from
the process sequence builder and planar geometry information
from the mask layout editor. Surface and volume meshes
are generated automatically for the purpose of simulation
of the device performance. The simulation allows the speciﬁ-
cation of voltage, temperature, mechanical stress, thermal
stress, and residual stress for a fully coupled analysis. At any
process step, the designer can access the material database,
MEMaterial, to investigate the effects of process parameters
on the structure. For example, the user can investigate the
stress of a silicon nitride thin ﬁlm by varying parameters
such as the temperature and pressure of deposition, the
radio frequency and power, and gas partial pressures. Once
an acceptable stress is achieved, the material properties and
fabrication information are automatically used for device
simulation.