interrupted is at a minimum. The breakers often do not
succeed in making the interruption during the ﬁrst attempt
and, as a result, several cycles of the fundamental frequency
current signal may be needed to completely interrupt the
current ﬂow. This affects the speed of the breaker operation.
The fastest breakers used at the high-voltage levels are one-
cycle breakers, whereas a typical breaker used at the lower
voltage levels may take 20 to 50 cycles to open. Circuit breakers
are initiated by the relays to disconnect the power system
component in the case a fault is present on the component.
In the case of the transmission line faults, many faults are
temporary in nature. To distinguish between permanent
and temporary faults on transmission lines, the concept of
breaker autoreclosing is used. It assumes that once the breaker
is tripped (opened) by the relay, it will stay open for a while,
and then it will automatically reclose. This action allows the
relays to verify if the fault is still present and, if so, to trip the
breaker again. In the case the fault has disappeared, the relays
will not act, and the transmission line will stay in service. The
autoreclosing function may be implemented quite differently
depending on the particular needs. The main options are to
have a single or multiple reclosing attempts and to operate
either a single pole or all three poles of the breaker. Circuit
breakers are also quite often equipped with auxiliary relays
called breaker failure (BF) relays. If the breaker fails to open
when called upon, the BF relay will initiate operation of other
circuit breakers that will disconnect the faulted element, quite
often at the expense of disconnecting some additional healthy
components. This may be observed in Figure 9.3: once a
transmission line relay operates the two breakers in the trans-
mission line bay and one of the breakers fails to operate, the BF
relay will disconnect all the breakers on the bus side where the
failed breaker is connected, making sure the faulted line is
disconnected from the bus.