Video Summarization
Once a video clip has been segmented into atomic units based
on visual content coherence, the next step is to compactly
represent the individual units. This task is the major block in
summarizing video content using a table of contents approach.
This step also facilitates efﬁcient matching between two shots
at query time for content-based retrieval. Most existing
systems represent video content by using one representative
frame from the shot called a keyframe. Keyframe-based repre-
sentation has been recognized as an important research issue in
content-based video abstraction. The simplest approach for
this problem is to use the ﬁrst frame of each shot as a keyframe
(Nagasaka and Tanaka, 1992). Although the approach is
simple, it is limited because each shot is allotted only one
frame for its representation irrespective of the complexity of
the shot content. In addition, the choice of the ﬁrst frame over
other frames in the shot is arbitrary. To have more ﬂexibility in
keyframe-based representation of a video shot, Zhang et al.
(1997) proposed to use multiple frames to represent each shot.
They used criteria such as color content change and zoom-in
type of effects in shot content to decide on the keyframes for
each shot. A technique for shot content representation and
similarity measure using subshot extraction and representa-
tion is presented in Lin et al. (2001). This approach uses
two content descriptors, dominant color histogram (DCH)
and spatial structure histogram (SSH), to measure content
variation and to represent subshots. The quantized hue, satu-
ration, and value (HSV) color histogram are First Computed
for each frame. Next, the dominant local maxima positions in
each frame’s histogram are identiﬁed and tracked throughout
the shot. After tracking, only the colors with longer durations
are retained as dominant colors of the shot. Histogram bins are
ﬁnally weighted by the duration of each bin in the whole shot.
SSH is computed based on spatial information of color blobs.
For each blob, histograms are computed for the area, position,
and deviation.