We next consider an FDTD modeling example where the
Courant stability condition is violated equally at every point
in a uniform two-dimensional TMz grid. To allow direct com-
parison with a previous example of stable pulse propagation,
the same grid in Figure 9.9 is used. The overall grid size is again
360  360 square cells with Dx ¼ Dy ¼ 1:0  D. Numerical
excitation to the grid is again provided by specifying a unit-
step time-function for the center Ez component. The only
condition that differs from those assumed in the original grid
is that the Courant factor S is increased above the threshold for
numerical instability given by equation 9.84.
Figure 9.12(A) visualizes the two-dimensional Ez distribu-
tion at n ¼ 40 time-steps for S ¼ 1:005  (1=
). This value
of S quickly generates a region of numerical instability spread-
ing out radially from the source, where the ﬁeld amplitudes are
large enough to mask the normal wave propagation. Individual
Ez components in the grid are depicted as square pixels. We see
that the unstable ﬁeld pattern has the form of a checkerboard,
wherein dark and gray pixels denote positive and negative Ez
values, respectively. Here, pixel saturation denotes the relative
amplitude of its positive or negative value.
Figure 9.12(B) graphs the variation of Ez versus radial dis-
tance from the source at n ¼ 200 time-steps for S ¼ 1:0005
p
(1=
). Two distinct plots are shown. The solid line graph
exhibits a rapid spatial oscillation with the period 2D. This is
the Ez behavior along the f ¼ 0, 90 (and similar on-axis)
cuts through the grid. The smooth dashed-dotted curve with
no spatial oscillation represents the Ez behavior along the
f ¼ 45 (and similar oblique) cuts through the grid. Analysis
of the underlying data reveals growth factors in the range 1.060
to 1.069 per time-step along the leading edge of the instability
region. This agrees very well with qgrowth ¼ 1:0653 calcu-
lated using equation 9.87 and is an excellent validation of the
Courant-factor-normalization theory.
An interesting observation in Figure 9.12(B) is that the
smooth Ez variation along f ¼ 45 forms the envelope of
the oscillatory Ez distribution observed along the grid’s major
axes. This difference in behavior is conﬁrmed in Figure
9.12(A), which shows that the f ¼ 45 cut lies entirely within
a diagonal string of dark (positive) pixels, whereas the f ¼ 0
cut passes through alternating dark (positive) and gray
(negative) pixels. We attribute this behavior to equation
9.86, which states that the exponential growth along the grid
diagonal has ~ll ¼
D. That is, the numerical wavelength
2
along the 458 observation cut for the unstable mode is exactly
the diagonal length across one D  D grid cell. Thus, there