Some examples of FTHN applications include the following.
A real-time network protocol used in local area networks
(LANs) is modeled using FTHNs in (Murata, et al., 1999).
Here we are interested in evaluating the worst-case performance
in a given network, where propagation delays, times for pro-
cessing message frames, and other such processes are speciﬁed
as trapezoidal fuzzy-time functions. The fuzziness is due to the
uncertain length (thus uncertain delay) of each message. In
addition, FTHN models are used for performance evaluation
of manufacturing systems, where the abilities of machines and/
or workers involved in a manufacturing process are fuzzily
known (Watanuki, 1999). Another area in which FTHN models
are applied is the synchronization of multimedia systems (Zhou
and Murata, 1998, 2001). Multimedia systems integrate a var-
iety of media with different temporal characteristics (e.g., time-
dependent media, such as video, audio, or animation) and
time-independent media (e.g., text, graphics, and images).
Thus, synchronization is a critical issue in these systems. The
temporal speciﬁcation has to be properly represented for pre-
sentation reviewing and planning by the user as well as for
storing purposes. Multimedia synchronization has a time-crit-
ical problem because it must guarantee the temporal constraints
for presenting the media items. Thus, there is a beneﬁt in using
FTHN methods to specify and analyze the temporal relations
and speciﬁcations. The FTHN method has been used to present
a new ﬁne-grained temporal FTHN model for distributed
multimedia synchronization (Zhou and Murata, 2001). The
FTHN method has also been applied to a video-on-demand
(VOD) system, which is a continuous playback multimedia
application in which constant real-time media data are required
for smooth real-time presentation. Thus, timing is a critical
issue, and the response time is the only timing that has direct
interaction with the subscribers and also impacts the quality-of-
service (QoS), as discussed by Murata and Chen (2000).