Christian communists hold the biblical verse Acts 4:32–35 as evidence that the first Christians lived in a communist society. Acts 4:32–35 reads, "All the believers were one in heart and mind. No one claimed that any of their possessions was their own, but they shared everything they had. With great power the apostles continued to testify to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. And Gods grace was so powerfully at work in them all that there were no needy persons among them. For from time to time those who owned land or houses sold them, brought the money from the sales and put it at the apostles feet, and it was distributed to anyone who had need."  There is evidence that what is described in Acts 4:32–35 is historical, and was practiced widely and taken seriously during at least the first two centuries of Christianity. Other biblical evidence of anti-capitalistic belief systems include Matthew 6:24, "No one can serve two masters.Either you will hate the one and love the other or you will be devoted to the one and despise the other.You cannot serve both God and money." Also, "each according to his abilities" has biblical origins too. Act 11:29 states: "29 Then the disciples, every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea." And "To each according to his needs" is biblical, too. Acts 4:35 "to the emissaries to distribute to each according to his need."
Thomas Wharton Collens' Preaching describes biblical sources supporting a common-property society.
Christian communism is not merely based on the principles of the early apostles. In fact Christian communists claim that anti-capitalist ideals are deeply rooted in the Christian faith. While capitalism had not yet formed in the time of Christ, his message was overwhelmingly against the love of money (greed) and in support of the poor. The principles of Christ are seen by Christian communists as staunchly anti-capitalist in nature. Christ taught that the love of money was the root of many evils, by that logic it seems only natural for Christians to oppose a social system founded entirely on the love of money, as Christian communists claim. In fact capitalist development was delayed largely by Christian opposition to the emergence of such a system. In fact it did not gather popular support until John Calvin brought about popular support of capitalism from a religious perspective. The ideals of Christian communism are pre-Calvinist and as such seek to return Christianity to its anti-capitalist roots by progressing beyond it into socialism and finally to communism.