Alpine skiing
In the women's giant slalom, Tina Maze (Slovenia) won the gold medal, with Anna Fenninger (Austria) in second, and Viktoria Rebensburg (Germany) finishing third. Maze recorded the fastest time in the first run with a time of 1:17.88. Rebensburg finished the second run with the fastest time at 1:17.90, but her overall score was 0.27 behind Maze. Fenninger also finished the second run with a faster time than Maze, but ended up with the silver with an overall score that was 0.07 behind.
Biathlon
After two postponements, the men's mass start was finally held. Emil Hegle Svendsen (Norway) finished first with a time of 42:29.1 and no penalties. Martin Fourcade (France) finished second, with Ondřej Moravec (Czech Republic) third.
Bobsleigh
In the two-woman competition, the American team of Elana Meyers and Lauryn Williams finished the first and second runs with the fastest times of 57.26 and 57.63, respectively. The Canadian team of Kaillie Humphries and Heather Moyse finished the day in second place, with the second American team of Jamie Greubel and Aja Evans in third.
Curling
Men's tournament
Tiebreaker, to qualify for the semifinals
Norway 5–6  Great Britain

Freestyle
In the men's halfpipe, David Wise (USA) won the gold medal with a score of 92.00 in the final round. Mike Riddle (Canada) finished second at 90.60, with Kevin Rolland (France) in third at 88.60. The day began with the qualification round, where the top twelve athletes advanced to the final; Justin Dorey (Canada) finished the qualification in first place with a score of 91.60 in the first run.
Ice hockey
Men's tournament
Qualification playoffs
Slovenia 4–0  Austria
Russia 4–0  Norway
Switzerland 1–3  Latvia
Czech Republic 5–3  Slovakia

Women's tournament
Fifth place game
Finland 4–0  Russia

Seventh place game
Germany 3–2  Japan

Nordic combined
In the individual large hill/10 km, Jørgen Graabak and Magnus Moan (both Norway) finished with the gold and silver medals. Fabian Rießle (Germany) finished with the bronze. The ski jumping section was led by Eric Frenzel (Germany) with 129.0 points, and Alessandro Pittin (Italy) completed the cross-country section with the fastest time at 22:20.5, but neither Frenzel nor Pittin ranked in the top five overall.
Short track speed skating
In the women's 1000m qualifying heats, the fastest two athletes in each heat qualified for the quarterfinals. The fastest time was recorded by Valérie Maltais (Canada) in 1:28.771 in the second heat.
In the men's 500m qualifying heats, the fastest two athletes in each heat qualified for the quarterfinals. The fastest time was recorded by Charle Cournoyer (Canada) in 41.180 in the second heat.
In the women's 3000 metre relay medal round, South Korea (Shim Suk-Hee, Park Seung-Hi, Kim A-Lang and Cho Ha-Ri) finished in the fastest time, 4:09.498 to win gold. Canada (Marie-Ève Drolet, Jessica Hewitt, Valérie Maltais and Marianne St-Gelais) finished second, and Italy (Arianna Fontana, Lucia Peretti, Martina Valcepina and Elena Viviani) took the bronze medal. This was preceded by the classification final, where the Russian team (Olga Belyakova, Tatiana Borodulina, Sofia Prosvirnova and Valeriya Reznik) finished in the fastest time (4:14.862).
Snowboarding
In the men's snowboard cross, Pierre Vaultier (France) finished first in the large (medal) final to take the gold, Nikolay Olyunin (Russia) finished with the silver, and Alex Deibold (USA) captured the bronze. Because of the previous day's cancellation of the seeding rounds, all competitors were seeded in the 1/8 finals based on the World Cup standings, with the top three in each heat qualified for the quarterfinals. Alex Pullin (Australia), Lucas Eguibar (Spain), Trevor Jacob (USA), Nikolay Olyunin (Russia), Konstantin Schad (Germany), Pierre Vaultier (France), Paul Berg (Germany) and Cameron Bolton (Australia) were the eight heat winners. In the quarterfinals, the top three qualified for the semifinals. Lucas Eguibar (Spain), Nikolay Olyunin (Russia), Pierre Vaultier (France) and Cameron Bolton (Australia) won their respective quarterfinals. In the semifinals, Nikolay Olyunin (Russia) and Pierre Vaultier (France) were the two winners, with the top three from each qualifying to the large (medal) final. Lucas Eguibar (Spain) won the small final to determine 7th to 12th place.
Speed skating
In the men's 10000 metres, the top three skaters were from the Netherlands, the fourth time they had won all three medals in a speed skating event during these Olympics. Jorrit Bergsma posted a Track and Olympic record time of 12:44.45 to win the gold. Sven Kramer finished second, with Bob de Jong finished third.