for  both 
Soldered 
electrical 
connection  of 
components with pins, tags, stripboards, and PCB. 
Before  a  soldering  operation  is  carried  out,  it  is 
vitally important that all surfaces to be soldered are 
clean  and  completely  free  of  grease  and/or  oxide 
films.  It  is  also  important  to  have  an  adequately 
rated  soldering  iron  fitted  with  an  appropriate  bit. 
The soldering iron bit is the all-important point of 
contact between the soldering iron and the joint and 
it should be kept scrupulously clean (using a damp 
sponge)  and  free  from  oxide.  To  aid  this  process, 
and promote heat transfer generally, the bit should 
be regularly ‘tinned’ (i.e. given a surface coating of 
molten solder). 
  The  selection  of  a  soldering  bit  (see  Figs  19.18 
and  19.19)  depends  on 
type  of  work 
undertaken.  Figure  19.20  shows  a  number  of 
popular bit profiles, the smaller bits being suitable 
for  sub-miniature  components  and  tightly  packed 
boards. The procedure for making soldered joints to 
terminal  pins  and  PCB  pads  are  shown  in  Figs 
19.21  and  19.22,  respectively.  In  the  case  of 
terminal pins, the component lead or wire should be 
wrapped  tightly  around  the  pin  using  at  least  one 
turn of wire made using a small pair of long-nosed 
pliers.  If  necessary,  the  wire  should  be  trimmed 
using a small pair of side cutters before soldering. 
Next, 
then  be 
simultaneously heated by suitable application of the 
soldering iron bit and then sufficient solder should 
be fed on to the pin and wire (not via the bit) for it 
to  flow  evenly  around  the  joint  thus  forming  an 
airtight ‘seal’. The solder should then be left to cool 
(taking  care  not  to  disturb  the  component  or  wire 
during  the  process).  The  finished  joint  should  be 
carefully  inspected  and  re-made  if  it  suffers  from 
any of the following faults: 
 
(a)  Too little solder. The solder has failed to flow 
around  the  entire  joint  and  some  of  the  wire 
 
 
turn or pin remains exposed. 
(b)  Too much solder. The solder has formed into a 
large  ‘blob’  the  majority  of  which  is  not  in 
 
 
direct contact with either the wire or the pin. 
(c)  The joint is ‘dry’. This usually occurs if either 
 
the temperature of the joint was insufficient to 
permit  the  solder  to  flow  adequately  or  if  the 
 
 
joint was disturbed during cooling. 