Stripboard layout techniques 
 
The following steps are required when laying out a 
circuit for stripboard construction: 
 
1.  Carefully examine a copy of the circuit diagram. 
2.  Mark all components to be mounted ‘off-board’ 
and  identify  (using  appropriate  letters  and/or 
 
numbers, e.g. SK, pin-2) all points at which an 
 
 
‘off-board’ connection is to be made. 
3.  Identify  any  multiple  connections  required 
between 
 
circuits  or  between 
integrated circuits and connectors. Arrange such 
 
components in physical proximity and with such 
 
 
orientation  that  will  effectively  minimize  the 
 
number of links required. 
4.  Identify  components 
 
 
 
 
5.  Keep inputs and outputs at opposite ends of the 
 
stripboard.  This  not  only  helps  maintain  a 
logical circuit layout (progressing from input to 
 
output) but, in high gain circuits, it may also be 
 
instrumental  in  preventing  instability  due  to 
 
 
unwanted feedback. 
6.  Use  standard  sizes  of  stripboard  wherever 
possible. Where boards have to be cut to size, it 
 
is usually more efficient to align the strips along 
 
 
the major axis of the board. 
7.  Consider the means of mounting the stripboard. 
If  it  is  to  be  secured  using  bolts  and  threaded 
 
spacers  (or  equivalent)  it  will  be  necessary  to 
 
allow  adequate  clearance  around  the  mounting 
 
 
holes. 
8.  Produce  a  rough  layout  for  the  stripboard  first 
using  paper  ruled  with  squares,  the  corners  of 
 
the  squares  representing 
 
the 
stripboard.  This  process  can  be  carried  out 
 
 
‘actual  size’  using  0.1  in.  graph  paper  or 
suitably  enlarged  by  means  of  an  appropriate 
 
choice  of  paper.  For  preference,  it  is  wise  to 
 
choose paper  with a feint blue or green grid as 
 
 
this  will 
after 
 
photocopying  leaving you with a ‘clean’ layout. 
9.  Identify  all  conductors  that  will  be  handling 
high  currents  (i.e.  those  in  excess  of  1  A)  and 
 
 
use  adjacent  strips  connected  in  parallel  at 
 
various points along the length of the board. 
10. Identify  the  strips  that  will  be  used  to  convey 