Once  the  solder  in  the  vicinity  of  the  pad  has 
become molten (this usually only takes one or two 
seconds)  and  desoldering  suction  pump  should  be 
used  to  remove  the  solder.  This  will  often  require 
only  one  operation  of  the  desoldering  pump; 
however, where a large area of solder is present or 
where not all of the solder in the vicinity of the pad 
has become molten, a second application of the tool 
may  be  required.  If  the  desoldering  tool  has  to  be 
repeatedly applied this usually indicates that either 
the tool is clogged with solder or that the soldering 
iron  is  not  hot  enough.  With  practice  only  one 
application  of  the  soldering  iron  and  soldering 
pump  should  be  required.  Once  cleared  of  solder, 
the  component  lead  should  become  free  and  a 
similar  process  should  be  used  for  any  remaining 
leads  or  pins.  Special  tools  arc  available  for  the 
rapid  removal  of  IC  and  SMD  devices  and  these 
permit  the  simultaneous  heating  of  all  pins  (see 
Figs 19.29 and 19.30). 
  When  desoldering  is  complete,  the  component 
should  be  gently  withdrawn  from 
the  upper 
(component) side of the board and the replacement 
component should be fitted, taking care to observe 
the  correct  polarity  and  orientation  where 
appropriate. The leads should protrude through the 
PCB to the copper foil side and should be trimmed 
to within a few millimetres of the copper pad then 
bent slightly (so that the component do not fall out 
when  the  board  is  inverted)  before  soldering  in 
place. Care should be taken to use the minimum of 
solder  consistent  with  making  a  sound  electrical 
and mechanical joint. As always, cleanliness of the 
soldering  iron  bit  is  extremely  important  if  dry 
joints arc to be avoided. 
  Finally, a careful visual examination of the joint 
should  be  carried  out.  Any  solder  splashes  or 
bridges between adjacent tracks should be removed 
and, if necessary, a sharp pointed instrument should 
be used to remove any surplus solder or flux which 
may be present. 
 
In  some  cases  it  may  be  expedient  (or  essential 
when the PCB has been mounted in such a position 
that the copper foil side is not readily accessible) to 
remove  a  component  by  cutting  its  leads  on  the 
upper  (component)  side  of  the  board.  However, 
care should be taken to ensure that sufficient lead is 
left  to  which  the  replacement  component  (with  its 
wires  or  pins  suitably  trimmed)  may  be  soldered. 
During  this  operation,  extra  care  must  be  taken 
when  the  soldering  iron  bit  is  placed  in  close 