supply  was that of examining a range of solutions 
before  deciding  on  the  particular  solution  that 
formed the basis of a prototype. Since the product 
has  both  electrical/electronic  and  mechanical 
aspects it was possible to consider these separately.  
  Research was needed to find a suitable electronic 
circuit  and  to  identify  the  components  that  would 
it.  Various  sources  of 
be  needed 
information  were  available 
including  books, 
magazines,  data  sheets  (see  Fig.  19.42)  from 
manufacturers  and  suppliers  as  well  as  the  Web. 
After  carrying  out  some  initial  investigation,  a 
suitable circuit design was located (see Fig. 19.43). 
This  circuit  was  based  on  two  low-cost  readily 
available 
(see 
requirements  2  and  3)  and  the  data  sheets  were 
obtained for each (see Fig. 19.42).  
  The 
initial  prototype  was  constructed  on 
stripboard and tested after fitting into the enclosure 
(as shown  in Fig. 19.47). A further prototype (see 
Fig.  19.48)  was  developed  using  a  printed  circuit 
board  (PCB),  the  track  layout  for  which  was 
designed using a PCB CAD package which had an 
autorouting facility.  
 
In order to satisfy requirements 1 and 4, a fully-
screened metal enclosure was used. This was based 
on a simple two-part construction (see requirements 
3).  An  internal  EMC  filter  was  fitted  in  order  to 
comply  with  the  EMC  directive  (see  requirement 
4).  Before  manufacturing  the  enclosure  it  was 
necessary  to  produce  some  general  arrangement 
and  detail  drawings  showing  how  the  sheet  metal 
should  be  drilled,  punched,  cut  and  bent.  These 
drawings had to be accurately dimensioned in order 
to  accommodate 
the  components  used.  The 
drawings  were  produced  using  a  simple  2D  CAD 
package.  One  drawing  was  produced  to  show  the 
enclosure top and front panel detail (see Fig. 19.44) 
whilst  a  second  drawing  was  used  to  show  the 
enclosure bottom and rear panel detail. 
  The material selected for the enclosure was 1.22 
mm  (18  SWG)  aluminium  sheet.  The  reasons  for 
the  choice  of  this  material  were  that  it  was 
reasonably  lightweight  (see  requirement  10),  low-
cost  (see  requirement  3),  and  easy  to  process.  It 
could  also  be  attractively  paint  finished.    Figures 
19.49 and 19.50 show the assembled prototype. 
 
Testing to specification 
 
Having  assembled  a  working  prototype  the  next 