Small-signal distortion analysis 
 
The  distortion analysis facility provided by SPICE-
driven  software  packages  computes  steady-state 
harmonic  and  inter-modulation  products  for  small 
input  signal  magnitudes.    If  signals  of  a  single 
frequency are specified as the  input to  the circuit, 
the  complex  values  of  the  second  and  third 
harmonics  are  determined  at  every  point  in  the 
circuit.  If there are signals of two frequencies input 
to  the  circuit,  the  analysis  finds  out  the  complex 
values  of  the  circuit  variables  at  the  sum  and 
difference  of  the  input  frequencies,  and  at  the 
difference of the smaller frequency from the second 
harmonic of the larger frequency. 
 
Sensitivity analysis 
 
Sensitivity analysis allows you to determine either 
the DC operating-point sensitivity or the AC small-
signal sensitivity of an output variable with respect 
to 
including  model  
parameters.  The  software  calculates  the  difference 
in  an  output  variable  (either  a  node  voltage  or  a 
branch  current)  by  perturbing  each  parameter  of 
each device independently.  Since the method is a 
numerical 
results  may 
demonstrate second order affects in highly sensitive 
parameters, or may fail to show very low but non-
zero  sensitivity.    Further,  since  each  variable  is 
perturbed  by  a  small  fraction  of  its  value,  zero-
valued  parameters  are  not  analysed  (this  has  the 
benefit  of  reducing  what  is  usually  a  very  large 
amount of data). 
 
Noise analysis 
 
The  noise  analysis  feature  determines  the  amount 
of noise generated by the components and devices 
(e.g. transistors) present in the circuit that is being 
analysed. When provided with an input source and 
an  output  port,  the  analysis  calculates  the  noise 
contributions  of  each  device  (and  each  noise 
generator  within  the  device)  to  the  output  port 
voltage.    It  also  calculates  the  input  noise  to  the 
circuit, equivalent to the output noise referred to the 
specified  input  source.    This  is  done  for  every 
frequency  point 
in  a  specified  range.  After 
calculating  the  spectral  densities,  noise  analysis 
integrates these values over the specified frequency 
range  to  arrive  at  the  total  noise  voltage/current 
(over this frequency range).   