the region of 30 to 90 seconds and after this period 
the  developed  image  of  the  track  layout  (an  etch-
resist positive) should be seen. 
  After developing the board it should be carefully 
washed  under  a  running  tap.  It  is  advisable  not  to 
rub  or  touch  the  board  (to  avoid  scratching  the 
surface) and the jet of water should be sufficient to 
remove  all  traces  of  the  developer.  Finally,  the 
board  should  be  placed  in  the  etchant  which  is  a 
ferric  chloride  solution  (FeCl3).  For  obvious 
reasons,  ferric  chloride  is  normally  provided  in 
crystalline form (though at least one major supplier 
is  prepared  to  supply  it  on  a  ‘mail  order  basis’  in 
concentrated  liquid  form)  and  should  be  added  to 
tap  water  (at  20°C)  following  the  instructions 
provided  by  the  supplier.  If  no  instructions  are 
given, the normal quantities involved are 750 ml of 
water  to  500  g  of  ferric  chloride  crystals.  Etching 
times  will  also  be  very  much  dependent  upon 
temperature  and  concentration  but,  for  a  fresh 
solution  warmed  to  around  40°C  the  time  taken 
should  typically  be  ten  to  fifteen  minutes.  During 
this time the board should be regularly agitated and 
checked to ascertain the state of etching. The board 
should  be  removed  as  soon  as  all  areas  not 
protected  by  resist  have  been  cleared  of  copper; 
failure  to  observe  this  precaution  will  result  in 
‘undercutting’ of the resist and consequent thinning 
of 
thermostatically 
controlled tanks are used, times of five minutes or 
less can be achieved when using fresh solution. 
 
It should go without saying that great care should 
be exercised when handling ferric chloride. Plastic 
or rubber gloves should be worn and care must be 
taken  to  avoid  spills  and  splashes.  After  cooling, 
the ferric chloride solution may be stored (using a 
sealed plastic container) for future use. In general, 
750 ml of solution can be used to etch around six to 
ten  boards  of  average  size;  the  etching  process 
taking  longer  as  the  solution  nears  the  end  of  its 
working  life.  Finally,  the  exhausted  solution  must 
be  disposed  of  with  care  (it  should  not  be  poured 
into an ordinary mains drainage system). 
Having  completed  the  etching  process,  the  next 
stage  involves  thorough-ly  washing,  cleaning,  and 
drying  the  printed  circuit  board.  After  this,  the 
board  will  be  ready  for  drilling.  Drilling  will 
normally involve the services of a 0.6 mm or 1 mm 
twist drill bit for standard component leads and IC 
pins. Larger drill bits may be required for the leads 
fitted  to  some  larger  components  (e.g.  power 