Static hazards 
 
Many of today’s electronic devices are susceptible 
to  damage  from  electric  fields  and  stray  static 
charges. Unfortunately, simply earthing the tip of a 
soldering  iron  is  not  sufficient  to  completely 
eliminate static damage and additional precautions 
may be required to avoid any risks of electro-static 
damage  (ESD).  These  may  involve  using  a  low-
voltage supply to feed the heating element fitted in 
the  soldering  iron,  incorporating  low/zero-voltage 
switching,  and  the  use  of  conductive  (antistatic) 
materials  in  the  construction  of  the  soldering  iron 
body and the soldering station itself.  
 
Burn, melt and fire hazards 
 
The bit of a soldering iron is usually maintained at 
a temperature of between 250°C and 350°C. At this 
temperature, 
insulating 
materials will melt and many other materials (such 
as  paper,  cotton,  etc.)  will  burn.  It  should  also  go 
without  saying  that  personal  contact  should  be 
avoided  at  all  times  and  the  use  of  a  properly 
designed soldering iron stand is essential. 
 
Shock hazards 
 
Mains  voltage  is  present  in  the  supply  lead  to  a 
mains  operated  soldering  iron  and  also  in  the 
supply  lead  to  any  soldering  station  designed  for 
use with a low-voltage iron. If the soldering iron bit 
comes into contact with a mains lead there can be a 
danger  that  the  insulation  will  melt  exposing  the 
live  conductors.  In  such  situations,  heatproof 
insulation  is  highly  recommended  both  for  the 
supply to the iron itself and also to any power unit. 
 
Soldering guns 
 
Soldering guns (where the bit is effectively a short-
circuited  turn)  can  become  extremely  hot  and 
continuous  operation  of  this  type  of  iron  can  be 
extremely  dangerous  as  the  mains  transformer 
fitted into the handle of the gun can easily become 
overheated. This can cause the insulation to reach a 
dangerously  high  temperature  which  can  result  in  
melting  and  short-circuits  which  will  cause 
permanent  damage  to  the  gun.  Because  of  their 
rather  clumsy  nature  and  high-power,  soldering 
guns  should  be  avoided  for  all  general  electronic 
work. 