(taking  care  to  ensure  that  it  is  placed  so  that  the 
component  side is  uppermost). The opaque plastic 
film  is  then  removed  from  the  photo-resist  board 
(previously  cut  roughly  to  size)  and  the  board  is 
then placed on top of the film (coated side down). 
The lid of the exposure unit is then closed and the 
timer  set  (usually  for  around  four  minutes  but  see 
individual  manufacturer’s  recommendations.  The 
inside of the lid is lined with foam which exerts an 
even  pressure  over  the  board  such  that  it  is  held 
firmly in place during the exposure process. 
 
It should be noted that, as with all photographic 
materials, sensitized copper board has a finite shelf-
life. Furthermore, boards should ideally be stored in 
a cool  place  at  a  temperature  of  between  2°C  and 
10°C. Shelf-life at 20°C will only be around twelve 
months and thus boards should be used reasonably 
promptly after purchase. 
  Note  that  it  is  not  absolutely  essential  to  have 
access to an ultra-violet light-box as we all have at 
least occasional access to an entirely free source of 
ultra-violet light. Provided one is prepared to wait 
for a sunny day and prepared to experiment a little, 
the exposure process can be carried out in ordinary 
sunlight. As a guide, and with the full sun present 
overhead,  exposure  will 
fifteen 
minutes. Alternatively, one can make use of a sun-
ray  lamp.  Again,  some  experimentation  will  be 
required in order to get the exposure right. With a 
lamp  placed  approximately  300  mm  from  the  sun 
ray  source  (and  arranged  so  that  the  whole  board 
surface is evenly illuminated) an exposure time of 
around four minutes will be required. Note that, if 
you use this technique, it is important to follow the 
sun-ray 
instructions 
concerning  eye  protection.  A  pair  of  goggles  or 
dark  sunglasses  can  be  used  to  protect  the  eyes 
during  the  exposure  process.  However  one  should 
never  look  directly  at  the  ultra-violet  light  source 
even when it is ‘warming up’. 
  Finally,  one  can  easily  manufacture  one’s  own 
light-box  (using  low-power  ultra-violet  tubes)  or 
make  use  of  a  standard  ultra-violet  bulb  (of 
between  150  W  and  300  W) suspended  above  the 
work area. If this technique is used, the bulb should 
be hung approximately 400 mm above the table on 
which the sensitized board, artwork and glass sheet 
have  been  placed.  A  typical  exposure  time  for  a 
300 W bulb is in the range of ten to fifteen minutes. 
A pair  of  dark  sunglasses  can  again  be  used  to 
protect  the  eyes  during  the  process.  Where  one  is 