 
 
 
 
6.  Unless the design makes extensive use of PCB 
 
edge  connectors,  try  to  ensure  that  a  common  
 
0  V  foil  is  run  all  round  the  periphery  of  the 
  PCB. This has a number of advantages  not the 
least  of  which  is  the  fact  that  it  will  then  be 
 
 
relatively simple to find a route to the 0 V rail 
 
from almost anywhere on the board. 
7.  Consider the  means of  mounting the PCB and, 
if  it  is  to  be  secured  using  bolts  and  threaded 
 
 
spacers (or equivalent) you should ascertain the 
 
number and location of the holes required. You 
  may  also  wish  to  ensure  that  the  holes  are 
coincident with the 0 V foil, alternatively where 
 
 
the 0 V rail is not to be taken to chassis ground, 
 
it  will  be  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  PCB 
  mounting holes occur in an area of the PCB that 
 
8.  Commence the PCB design in rough first using 
 
paper  ruled  with  squares.  This  process  can  be 
carried  out  ‘actual  size’  using  0.1  in.  graph 
 
paper  or  suitably  enlarged  by  means  of  an 
 
 
appropriate choice of paper. For preference, it is 
  wise to choose paper with a feint blue or green 
 
grid  as  this  will  subsequently  disappear  after 
 
photocopying leaving you with a ‘clean’ layout. 
9.  Using the square grid as a guide, try to arrange 
all components so that they are mounted on the 
 
 
standard  0.1  in.  matrix.  This  may  complicate 
things  a  little  but  is  important  if  you  should 
 
subsequently  wish  to  convert  the  design  using 
 
computer-aided    design  (CAD)  techniques  (see 
 
 
later).  
10. Arrange straight runs of track so that they align 
  with one dimension of the board or another. Try 
 
11. Identify  all  conductors  that  will  be  handling 
 
significant  current  (i.e.  in  excess  of  about 
 
500  mA)  and  ensure  that  tracks  have  adequate 
  widths.  Table  19.1  will  acts  as  a  rough  guide. 
  Note that, as a general rule, the width of the 0 V 
track should be at least twice that used for any 
 
 
other track. 
12. Identify  all  conductors  that  will  be  handling 
high voltages (i.e. those in excess of 150 V d.c. 
 
 
or  100  V  r.m.s.  a.c.)  and  ensure  that  these  are 
adequately spaced from other tracks. Table 19.2 
 
 
provides you with a rough guide. 