operation whilst as a destination register it will be 
used to hold the result of a particular operation. The 
accumulator (or A-register) features in a very large 
number of microprocessor operations, consequently 
more  reference  is  made  to  this  register  than  any 
others. 
 
Instruction register 
 
temporary 
The  instruction  register  provides  a 
storage 
current 
the 
microprocessor instruction is held whilst it is being 
decoded.  Program  instructions  are  passed  into  the 
microprocessor, one at time, through the data bus.   
  On  the  first  part  of  each  machine  cycle, the 
instruction is fetched and decoded. The instruction 
is  executed  on 
the  second  (and  subsequent) 
machine cycles. Each  machine cycle takes a finite 
time  (usually  less  than  a  microsecond)  depending 
upon the frequency of the microprocessor’s clock. 
 
Data bus (D0 to D7) 
 
The external data bus provides a highway for data 
that  links  all  of  the  system  components  (such  as 
random  access  memory,  read-only  memory,  and 
input/output  devices)  together.  In  an  8-bit  system, 
the  data  bus  has  eight  data  lines,  labelled  D0  (the 
least  significant  bit) to  D7  (the  most  significant 
bit) and  data  is  moved  around  in  groups  of  eight 
bits, or bytes. With a sixteen bit data bus the data 
lines are labelled D0 to D15, and so on. 
 
Data bus buffer 
 
The data bus buffer is a temporary register through 
which bytes of data pass on their way into, and out 
of, the  microprocessor. The buffer is  thus referred 
to  as  bi-directional  with  data  passing  out  of  the 
microprocessor  on  a write operation  and  into  the 
processor  during  a  read  operation. The  direction 
of data transfer is determined by the control unit as 
it responds to each individual program instruction. 
 
Internal data bus 
 
The internal data bus is a high-speed data highway 
that  links  all  of  the  microprocessor’s  internal 
elements  together.  Data 
is  constantly  flowing 
backwards and forwards along the internal data bus 
lines. 