signals  between  the  stages  of  amplifiers,  and 
decoupling  supply  rails  (i.e.  effectively  grounding 
the supply rails as far as a.c. signals are concerned).     
  A capacitor can consist of nothing more than two 
parallel metal plates as shown in Fig. 1.10 on page 
11. To understand  what  happens  when a capacitor 
is being charged and discharged take a look at Fig. 
2.22.  If  the  switch  is  left  open  (position  A),  no 
charge  will  appear  on  the  plates  and  in  this 
condition there will be no electric field in the space 
between  the  plates  nor  will  there  be  any  charge 
stored in the capacitor. 
  When  the  switch  is  moved  to  position  B, 
electrons will be attracted from the positive plate to 
the  positive  terminal  of  the  battery.  At  the  same 
time, a similar number of electrons will move from 
the negative terminal of the battery to the negative 
plate.  This  sudden  movement  of  electrons  will 
manifest  itself  in  a  momentary  surge  of  current 
(conventional  current  will  flow  from  the  positive 
terminal of the battery towards the positive terminal 
of the capacitor). 
  Eventually, enough electrons will have moved to 
make the e.m.f. between the plates the same as that 
of the battery. In this state, the capacitor is said to 
be  fully  charged  and  an  electric  field  will  be 
present in the space between the two plates. 
 
If, at some later time the switch is moved back to 
position  A,  the  positive  plate  will  be  left  with  a 
deficiency  of  electrons  whilst  the  negative  plate 
will  be 
surplus  of  electrons. 
Furthermore,  since  there  is  no  path  for  current  to 
flow  between  the  two  plates  the  capacitor  will 
remain  charged  and  a  potential  difference  will  be 
maintained between the plates. 
  Now assume that the switch is moved to position 
C.  The  excess  electrons  on  the  negative  plate  will 
flow through the resistor to the positive plate until a 
neutral state once again exists (i.e. until there is no 
excess  charge  on  either  plate).  In  this  state  the 
capacitor  is  said  to  be  fully  discharged  and  the 
electric  field  between  the  plates  will  rapidly 
collapse.  The  movement  of  electrons  during  the 
discharging  of  the  capacitor  will  again  result  in  a 
momentary surge of current (current will flow from 
the  positive  terminal  of  the  capacitor  and  into  the 
resistor). 
  Figure  2.23  shows  the  direction  of  current  flow 
in the circuit of Fig. 2.22 during charging (switch in 
position B) and discharging (switch in position C). 
It  should  be  noted  that  current  flows  momentarily 