positive  with  respect  to  point  C.  In  this  condition 
D1 will allow conduction (its anode will be positive 
with respect to its cathode) while D2 will not allow 
conduction (its anode will be negative with respect 
to its cathode). Thus D1 alone conducts on positive 
half-cycles. 
  On negative half-cycles, point C will be positive 
with respect to point B. Similarly, point B will be 
positive  with  respect  to  point  A.  In  this  condition 
D2 will allow conduction (its anode will be positive 
with respect to its cathode) while D1 will not allow 
conduction (its anode will be negative with respect 
to its cathode). Thus D2 alone conducts on negative 
half-cycles. 
  Figure  6.11  shows  the  bi-phase  rectifier  circuit 
with the diodes replaced by switches. In Fig. 6.11
(a) D1 is shown conducting on a positive half-cycle 
while in Fig. 6.11(b) D2 is shown conducting. The 
result  is  that  current  is  routed  through  the  load  in 
the  same  direction  on  successive  half-cycles. 
Furthermore,  this  current  is  derived  alternately 
from the two secondary windings. 
  As  with  the  half-wave  rectifier,  the  switching 
action  of  the  two  diodes  results  in  a  pulsating 
output  voltage  being  developed  across  the  load 
resistor (RL). However, unlike the half-wave circuit 
the  pulses  of  voltage  developed  across  RL will 
occur at a frequency of 100 Hz (not  50 Hz). This 
doubling  of  the  ripple  frequency  allows  us  to  use 
smaller values of reservoir and smoothing capacitor 
to obtain the same degree of ripple reduction (recall 
that  the  reactance  of  a  capacitor  is  reduced  as 
frequency increases). 
  As before, the peak voltage produced by each of 
the secondary windings will be approximately 17 V 
and the peak voltage across RL will be 16.3 V (i.e. 
17  V  less  the  0.7  V  forward  threshold  voltage 
dropped by the diodes). 
  Figure  6.12  shows  how  a  reservoir  capacitor 
(C1) can be added to ensure that the output voltage 
remains at, or near, the peak voltage even when the 
diodes  are  not  conducting.  This  component 
operates  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  for  the  half-
wave circuit, i.e. it charges to approximately 16.3 V 
at the peak of the positive half-cycle and holds the 
voltage  at  this  level  when  the  diodes  are  in  their 
non-conducting states. The time required for C1 to 
charge to the maximum (peak) level is determined 
by  the  charging  circuit  time  constant  (the  series 
resistance  multiplied  by  the  capacitance  value).  In 
this  circuit,  the  series  resistance  comprises  the 