Surface  mounted  components  are  supplied 
in 
packages that are designed for mounting directly on 
the surface of a PCB. To provide electrical contact 
with  the  PCB,  some  SMC  have  contact  pads  on 
their  surface.  Other  devices  have  contacts  which 
extend beyond the outline of the package itself but 
which  terminate  on  the  surface  of  the  PCB  rather 
than making contact through a hole (as is the case 
with  a  conventional  THC).  In  general,  passive 
components  (such  as  resistors,  capacitors  and 
inductors)  are  configured 
leadless  for  surface 
mounting, whilst active devices (such as transistors 
and integrated circuits) are available in both surface 
mountable  types  as  well  as  lead  as  well  as  in 
leadless  terminations  suitable  for  making  direct 
contact to the pads on the surface of a PCB. 
  Most  surface  mounted  components  have  a  flat 
rectangular shape rather than the cylindrical shape 
that  we  associate  with  conventional  wire  leaded 
components.  During  manufacture  of  a  PCB,  the 
various  SMC  are  attached  using  re-flow  soldering 
paste (and in some cases adhesives) which consists 
of particles of solder and flux together with binder, 
solvents  and  additives.  They  need  to  have  good 
‘tack’ in order to hold the components in place and 
remove oxides without leaving obstinate residues.  
  The  component  attachment  (i.e.  soldering!) 
process 
is  completed  using  one  of  several 
techniques including convection ovens in which the 
PCB  is  passed,  using  a  conveyor  belt,  through  a 
convection  oven  which  has  separate  zones  for 
preheating,  flowing  and  cooling,  and  infra-red  re-
flow in  which infra-red lamps are used to provide 
the source of heat. 
  Surface  mounted  components  are  generally  too 
small  to  be  marked  with  colour  codes.  Instead, 
values  may  be  marked  using  three  digits.  For 
example,  the  first  two  digits  marked  on  a  resistor 
normally  specify  the  first  two  digits  of  the  value 
whilst the third digit gives the number of zeros that 
should be added.  
 
Example 2.32 
 
In  Fig.  1.18,  R88  is  marked  ‘102’.  What  is  its 
value? 
 
Solution 
 
R88 will have a value of 1,000 $ (i.e. 10 followed 
by two zeros). 