Power amplifiers 
 
The  term  ‘power  amplifier’  can  be  applied  to  any 
amplifier that is designed to deliver an appreciable 
level  of  power.  There  are  several 
important 
considerations for amplifiers of this type, including 
the ability to deliver current (as well as voltage) to 
a load,  and  also  the  need  to  operate  with  a 
reasonable  degree  of  efficiency 
that 
conventional Class A amplifiers are inefficient). 
 
In order to deliver sufficient current to the load, 
power  amplifiers  must  have  a  very  low  value  of 
output impedance. Thus the final stage (or output 
stage) is  usually  based  on  a  device  operating  in 
emitter-follower  configuration.  In  order  to  operate 
at a reasonable level of efficiency, the output stage 
must  operate  in  Class  AB  or  Class  B  mode  (see 
page  133).  One  means  of  satisfying  both  of  these 
requirements  is  with  the  use  of  a  symmetrical 
output  stage  based  on  complementary  NPN  and 
PNP devices. 
  A simple  complementary  output  stage  is 
shown    in  Fig.  7.45. TR1  is a  suitably  rated  NPN 
device  whilst  TR2  is  an  identically  rated  PNP 
device.  Both  TR1  and  TR2  operate  as  emitter 
followers  (i.e.  common-collector  mode)  with  the 
output taken from the two emitters, coupled via C2 
to the load. In order to bias TR1 and TR2 into Class 
AB mode two silicon diodes (D1 and D2) are used 
to provide a constant voltage drop of approximately 
1.2 V between the two bases. This voltage drop is 
required  between  the  bases  of  TR1  and  TR2  in 
order  to  bring  them  to  conduction.  Since  D1  and 
D2  are  both  in  forward  conduction  (with  current 
supplied  via  R1 and  R2)  they  have  little  effect  on  
the input signal (apart from shifting the d.c. level). 
  Figure 7.46 shows an improvement of the basic 
complementary output stage with the addition of a 
driver  stage  (TR1)  and  a  means  of  adjusting  the 
bias  (i.e.  operating  point)  of  the  two  output  
transistors.  VR1  is  typically  adjusted  in  order  to  
produce  an  output  stage  collector  current  of 
between 15 mA and 50 mA (required for Class AB 
operation).  With  VR1  set  to  minimum  resistance, 
the  output  stage  will  operate  in  Class  B  (this  will 
produce  significantly  more  cross-over  distortion 
because the two devices may both be cut-off for a 
brief period of each cycle). Figure 7.47 shows how 
negative  feedback  bias  (via  R2)  can  be  added  in 
order to stabilize the output stage. Practical power 
amplifiers are shown in Figs 7.48 and 7.49. 