Integrated circuit faults 
 
Integrated  circuits  may  fail  in  various  ways. 
Occasionally,  the  manifestation  of  the  fault  is 
simply  a  chip  which  is  chronically  overheated— 
the judicious application of a finger tip to the centre 
of  the  plastic  package  will  usually  help  you  to 
identify such a failure. Any chip that is noticeably 
hotter  than  others  of  a  similar  type  should  be 
considered  suspect.  Where  integrated  circuits  are 
fitted  in  sockets,  it  will  be  eminently  possible  to 
remove  and  replace  them  with  known  functional 
devices  (but,  do  remember  to  switch  ‘off’  and 
disconnect the supply during the process). 
 
In  the  case  of  digital  circuitry,  the  task  of 
identifying a logic gate which is failing to perform 
its logical function can be accomplished by various 
means but the simplest and most expedient is with 
the  aid  of  a  logic  probe  (see  page  282).  This 
invaluable tool comprises a hand-held probe fitted 
with  LED to indicate the logical state of its probe 
tip.  
In  use,  the  logic  probe  is  moved  from  point  to 
 
point  within  a  logic  circuit  and  the  state  of  each 
node is noted and compared with the expected logic 
level. In order to carry out checks on more complex 
logic  arrangements  a  logic  pulser  may  be  used  in 
conjunction  with  the  logic  probe.  The  pulser 
provides  a  means  of  momentarily  changing  the 
state  of  a  node  (regardless  of  its  actual  state)  and 
thus permits, for example, the clocking of a bistable 
element (see page 284). 
  Operational  amplifiers  can  usually  be  checked 
using  simple  d.c.  voltage  measurements.  The  d.c. 
voltages  appearing  at  the  inverting  and  non-
inverting inputs should be accurately measured and 
compared. Where the voltage at the inverting input 
is  more  positive  with  respect  to  that  at  the  non-
inverting  input,  the  output  voltage  will  be  high 
(positive  if  the  operational  amplifier  is  operated 
from a dual supply rail).  
  Conversely, if the  voltage  at the  inverting input 
is negative, with respect to that at the non-inverting 
input,  the  output  voltage  will  be  high  (positive  if 
the  operational  amplifier  is  operating  from  a  dual 
supply).  
  Finally,  if  both  inputs  are  at  0  V  and  there  is 
virtually  no  difference  in  the  input  voltages,  the 
output should also be close to 0 V. If it is high or 
low  (or  sitting  at  one  or  other  of  the  supply 
voltages) the device should be considered suspect. 