the holes and soldered into place. Strips (or tracks) 
are  linked  together  with  short  length  of  tinned 
copper  wire  (inserted  through  holes  in  the  board 
and  soldered  into  place  on  the  underside  of  the 
board).  Tracks  can  be  broken  at  various  points  as 
appropriate. The advantage of this technique is that 
it avoids the need for a printed circuit board (which 
may  be  relatively  expensive  and  may  take  some 
time  to  design).  Disadvantages  of  matrix  board 
construction are that it  is  usually only  suitable for 
one-off production and the end result is invariably 
less  compact  than  a  printed  circuit  board.  The 
matrix  board  shown  in  Fig.  19.3  is  a  simple 
oscilloscope calibrator based on a PIC16F84. 
 
Printed circuit boards 
Printed  circuit  board  construction  (see  Fig.  19.4) 
technique  is  ideal  for  volume  manufacture  of 
electronic circuits where speed and repeatability of 
production  are 
the 
complexity  of  a  circuit,  various  types  of  printed 
circuit board are possible. The most basic form of 
printed circuit (and one which is suitable for home 
construction)  has  copper  tracks  on  one  side  and 
components  mounted  on  the  other.  More  complex 
printed  circuit  boards  have  tracks  on  both  sides 
(they  are  referred  to  as  ‘double-sided’)  whilst 
boards with up to four layers are used for some of 
the  most  sophisticated  and  densely  packed 
electronic  equipment 
(for  example,  computer 
motherboards).  The  double-sided  printed  circuit 
board  shown  in  Fig.  19.4  is  part  of  an  instrument 
landing system (ILS) fitted to a passenger aircraft.  
  A further example of printed circuit construction 
is  shown  in  Fig.  19.5.  This  shows  ‘zig-zag’ 
inductive  components  fabricated  using  the  copper 
track 
‘chip’ 
capacitors  and  a  leadless    transistor  which  is 
soldered directly to the surface of the copper track. 
 
Surface mounting 
 
Figure 19.6 shows an example of surface mounting 
construction.  This  technique  is  suitable  for  sub-
miniature leadless components. These are designed 
for  automated  soldering  directly  to  pads  on  the 
surface  of  a  printed  circuit  board.  This  technique 
makes it possible to pack in the largest number of 
components  into  the  smallest  space  but,  since  the 
components 
require  specialized  handling  and 
soldering  equipment,  it  is  not  suitable  for  home 