memory,  whilst  the  PIC16C57  had  2K  ×  12-bit 
words  of  EPROM  program  memory  and  80  bytes 
of  RAM  data  memory.  All  of  these  devices  also 
featured  an  8-bit  real-time  clock/counter  and  a 
watchdog timer. 
  The mid-range family of PIC devices contained a 
number of devices that expanded on the capabilities 
of the base-line devices. Of particular note are the 
PIC16C71,  which  added  A/D  inputs  capable  of 
reading  analogue 
the  popular 
PIC16C84, which featured EEPROM program and 
data  memory.  Because  of 
the 
PIC16C84  could  be  erased  electronically  (without 
the  need  for  the  ultraviolet  eraser  required  for 
EPROM erasure), it soon became a favourite  with 
hobbyists and must have been the most popular PIC 
for many years. 
  The  high-end  device  was  the  PIC17C42.  This 
device came in a 40-pin package and featured 16-
bit  wide  instructions.  It  also  allowed  for  external 
memory to be interfaced and supported up to 64K × 
6-bit  of  addressable  program  memory  space.  The 
device provided 33 digital I/O pins, EEPROM data 
memory,  a  serial  port  (USART),  three  16-bit 
timer/counters  and  two  high-speed  pulse  width 
modulation (PWM) outputs. 
  There are now more than 200 different PIC chips 
available  and  the  ‘Base-Line’,  ‘Mid-Range’  and 
‘High-End’ classification has now been replaced by 
several different ranges of PIC families such as the 
PIC-10,  PIC-12,  PIC-16  and  PIC-18.  Generally 
speaking,  the  higher  the  family  number,  the  more 
terms  of  processing 
powerful 
capabilities,  memory  sizes  and 
features. 
Another  feature  of  many  of  the  devices  is  Flash 
program  memory. These  devices  can  be  erased 
and 
the 
previously  popular  PIC16C84.  These  Flash 
memory devices are signified by a letter ‘F’ in their 
part  number  (e.g.  PIC16F877A).  Note  that  Flash 
devices  are  much  easier  to  work  with  for  one-off 
prototyping because erasure and reprogramming is 
greatly simplified. 
 