Before explaining how the quantum theory solves these flaws, there are a number of concepts that need to be understood. The first concept is that of the uncertainty principle, which states that since it is already known that the electrons are present in the space of the metal (i.e., something about its position is known), then there can not be zero kinetic energy (it must have some speed). This is very different from the classical viewpoint where it is assumed that at T=0 all the electrons would have a kinetic energy of zero. Also, the exclusion principle prevents more than two electrons from being present in the lowest energy level. This means that there are two electrons in each energy level.
By applying these concepts and creating a new quantum understanding of conduction, the problems that existed with the classical theory now disappear. In the classical theory it was shown that the square root of <v> was proportional to the resistivity. Now, since the net shift of velocity of all the electrons in an electric field is really the same as shifting only the Fermi electrons, in the case of thermal conductivity, the Fermi velocity can replace the <v> in the classical equation for resistivity. Then, since there is no temperature dependency involved in the Fermi speed, there no longer exists the problem of conflicting experimental and theoretical relationships between speed and temperature.
There is one important change that must be made to ensure the validity of these equations, and that is in regard to the collisions of electrons. In the classical theory, the collision was seen as similar to that of a ball with a wall: a particle bouncing off another. In the quantum understanding, an electron is viewed as a wave traveling through a medium. When the wavelength of the electrons is larger than the crystal spacing, the electrons will propagate freely throughout the metal without collision, therefore their scattering is only the result of imperfections in the crystal lattice of the metal. These imperfections are the results of such changes as thermal vibrations. This means that the ion’s cross sectional area is no longer important, but rather the amplitude of these vibrations and the deviations of these ions are what determines the mean free path. Fittingly, the r that was emphasized in the classical mean free path equation as being the radius of the ions, is now replaced with an r representing the amplitude of the oscillation of those ions. The beauty of this change is that now the mean free path equation gives a linearly proportional relationship between ρ and T, and not the problematic T.05 relationship.