A jet of air will entrain molecules of air from its immediate surroundings, causing a "tube," or "sleeve," of low pressure around the jet (see image 1 in the diagram on the left). Ambient air from around this tube of low pressure will exert a force on the jet, which, when seen in cross section, is equal in all directions. The jet will therefore not deviate from moving in a straight line. However, if a solid surface is placed close, and approximately parallel, to the jet (see image 2 in the diagram on the left), the entrainment (and therefore removal) of air from between the solid surface and the jet causes a reduction in air pressure on that side of the jet that cannot be neutralized as rapidly as the low pressure region on the "open" side of the jet. The pressure difference across the jet causes the jet to deviate towards the nearby surface, and then to adhere to it (image 3 on the left). The jet will then adhere to the surface even if it is curved (image 4 on the left), because each (infinitesimally small) incremental change in direction of the surface will bring about the effects described for the initial bending of the jet towards the surface. If the surface is not too sharply curved, the jet can, under the right circumstances, adhere to the surface even after flowing 180° round a cylindrically curved surface, and therefore be traveling in a direction opposite to its initial direction. The forces that cause these changes in the direction of flow of the jet cause an equal and opposite force on the surface along which the jet flows. These Coandă effect induced forces can be harnessed to cause lift and other forms of motion, depending on the orientation of the jet and the surface to which the jet adheres.
A small "lip" on the surface at the point where the jet starts to flow over that surface (see image 5 in the diagram on the left), enhances the initial deviation of the direction of flow of the jet, and its subsequent adherence to the surface. This results from the fact that a low pressure vortex forms behind the lip, promoting the dip of the jet towards the surface.
The Coandă effect can be induced in any fluid, and is therefore equally effective in water as in air.