Concept inventories are education-related diagnostic tests. In 1985 Halloun and Hestenes introduced a "multiple-choice mechanics diagnostic test" to examine students' concepts about motion. It evaluates student understanding of basic concepts in classical (macroscopic) mechanics. A little later, the Force Concept Inventory (FCI), another concept inventory, was developed. The FCI was designed to assess student understanding of the Newtonian concepts of force. Hestenes (1998) found that while "nearly 80% of the [students completing introductory college physics courses] could state Newton's Third Law at the beginning of the course. FCI data showed that less than 15% of them fully understood it at the end".These results have been replicated in a number of studies involving students at a range of institutions (see sources section below). That said, there remains questions as what exactly the FCI measures. Results from Hake (1998) using the FCI have led to greater recognition in the science education community of the importance of students' "interactive engagement" with the materials to be mastered.

.
Since the development of the FCI, other physics instruments have been developed. These include the Force and Motion Conceptual Evaluation developed by Thornton and Sokoloff and the Brief Electricity and Magnetism Assessment developed by Ding et al. For a discussion of how a number of concept inventories were developed see Beichner. Information about physics concept tests can be found at the NC State Physics Education Research Group website (see the external links below).
In addition to physics, concept inventories have been developed in statistics, chemistry, astronomy, basic biology, natural selection, genetics, engineering, geoscience. and computer science.
In many areas, foundational scientific concepts transcend disciplinary boundaries. An example of an inventory that assesses knowledge of such concepts is an instrument developed by Odom and Barrow (1995) to evaluate understanding of diffusion and osmosis. In addition, there are non-multiple choice conceptual instruments, such as the essay-based approach suggested by Wright et al. (1998) and the essay and oral exams used by Nehm and Schonfeld (2008). and Cooper et al  to measure student understanding of Lewis structures in chemistry.