Conductor gallop analysis overlaps several academic disciplines. Mechanical vibrations covers the laws of motion of the conductor and the long conductor acts as a mass suspended by an elastic spring obeying Hooke's law. Within the discipline of Mechanical vibration, conductor gallop is categorized as a self-excited vibration because the forces which generate conductor gallop are generated by the motion itself. One of the early leaders in modern mechanical vibrations, J. P. Den Hartog, described conductor gallop in a chapter on self-excited vibrations in his text book Mechanical Vibrations, copyrighted in 1956 and reprinted by Dover Publications, where he develops general stability criteria for conductor gallop but without a complete mathematical solution. However, conductor gallop analysis also relates to Civil engineering because the electric conductors are carried by towers and the study of wind influences on structures, including any kind of vibration, has been much studied, especially after the collapse of the Tacoma Narrows bridge due to flutter from the structural members. In fact, perfectly round electrical conductors experience vortex shedding in certain ranges of the Reynolds number. The underlying behavior in the conductor gallop phenomenon also applies to other civil engineering structural elements such as cables and stays on bridges. A more recent reference related to the analysis of conductor gallop is Flow-Induced Vibrations, An Engineering Guide, by Eduard Naudascher and Donald Rockwell copyrighted in 1994 and still published by Dover Publications in 2005, in which experimental data related to vortex shedding frequencies as well as the aerodynamic forces on various structure shapes including cylinder models for a conductor or cable. Another book titled Flow-Induced Vibration by Robert D. Blevins, 2nd Edition published by Van Nostrand-Reinhold in 1990, also treats conductor gallop while reporting experimental data related to vortex shedding and aerodynamic forces on various structural shapes. Both of the last-mentioned works include references to scientific and engineering journal articles, many of which directly relate to conductor gallop. In aeronautical engineering the term "flutter" is used to describe conductor gallop and analogous other phenomena involving aerodynamic forces interacting with elastic structures having inertial mass.