a. Mishandling
The failure of a handler to remove loose items from their person can result in these items striking a clock’s surface. A handler who uses his or her bare hands to touch or transport a clock exposes the clock to contaminants, leaving “unsightly and potentially damaging marks.”  A handler who chooses to drag rather than lift a clock “[...] can place stress on the legs and feet of the clock.”  Lifting a clock via false handles or non-sturdy components may cause these parts to snap off of the clock, potentially leading to the clock falling and smashing on a surface.
b. Over-winding or improper hand setting
Improper clock winding and hand setting procedures can cause serious damage to clockwork components. The use of an inappropriate key to wind a clock is one such improper procedure. The manner in which a clock is wound is also important, as “[...] considerable and potentially expensive damage can be caused by not winding gently and steadily”, as well as by turning the key one too many times.
In terms of improper hand setting, manually moving the hour or seconds hand rather than the minute hand in an attempt to set the time can be damaging, as can be counterclockwise hand turning. Moving the minute hand ahead on a clock by several hours when setting the time can also lead to clockwork damage. For this reason, “Rather than turning the hands forward through several hours it is better to stop the clock and re-start it when the time matches that on the dial.”
c. Unsuitable storage or display
Unsuitable storage and display environments pose great risks to a clock’s condition. Placement of a clock on an unstable surface or non secure mounting on a wall can cause a clock to fall when external vibrations or human caused accidents occur.
d. Improper cleaning and polishing
Many cleaners and polishers contain properties that “[...] have been proven to age poorly.”  Resultantly, the use of such cleaners and polishers can prove detrimental. The use of ammonia based cleaning products for example on brass clock components can lead to an irreversible form of damage called Stress Corrosion Cracking. Depending on the type of metal on which it is used, a metallic brush employed to apply cleaning products not only can create the proper conditions for corrosion, but can “[...] remove any protective oxide layers even with careful use.”
e. Improper lubrication
Attempts by non-professionals to lubricate or repair clockwork can lead to serious damage and loss of clock functionality. A lubricant applied without first cleaning and polishing clockwork to remove the previous lubricant and contaminants can result in wear rather than prevent it. The combination of the newly applied lubricant with the previous lubricant often results in “[...] an unwanted chemical reaction between the two lubricants [...].”  A careless lubricant choice can result in the use of inappropriate or "Poor-quality oil" on clockwork, which "can become sticky leading to mechanical problems."  The inexperience of a non-professional can also lead to “the use of too much oil, or oil in the wrong place”  during attempts to lubricate clockwork. The application of too much of a lubricant can be damaging because it “[...] usually causes the lubrication to run out of the bearing and by capillary action will cause the bearing to go dry.”  Totally ignoring the lubrication needs of clockwork can be jeopardizing not only because of lubricant degradation, but because of the acidic nature of the organic lubricants often used in antique clocks.