A subset of CVT designs are called infinitely variable transmissions (IVT or IVTs), in which the range of ratios of output shaft speed to input shaft speed includes a zero ratio that can be continuously approached from a defined "higher" ratio. A zero output speed (low gear) with a finite input speed implies an infinite input-to-output speed ratio, which can be continuously approached from a given finite input value with an IVT. Low gears are a reference to low ratios of output speed to input speed. This low ratio is taken to the extreme with IVTs, resulting in a "neutral", or non-driving "low" gear limit, in which the output speed is zero. Unlike neutral in a normal automotive transmission, IVT output rotation may be prevented because the back-driving (reverse IVT operation) ratio may be infinite, resulting in impossibly high backdriving torque; in a ratcheting IVT, however, the output may freely rotate in the forward direction.
In the early decades of the 20th century, several tractors and small locomotives were built with friction-disk transmissions with an output disk rolling on the face of the input disk. For disks of identical diameter, the effective gear ratio could be varied from 1:1 when the point of contact was at the perimeter of the input disk, to infinity when the point of contact was at the center, to -1:1 when the point of contact was at the opposite extreme. The transmission on early Plymouth locomotives worked this way, while on tractors using friction disks, the range of reverse speeds was typically limited.
The ratcheting IVT dates back to before the 1930s; the original design converts rotary motion to oscillating motion and back to rotary motion using roller clutches. The stroke of the intermediate oscillations is adjustable, varying the output speed of the shaft. This original design is still manufactured today, and an example and animation of this IVT can be found here. Paul B. Pires created a more compact (radially symmetric) variation that employs a ratchet mechanism instead of roller clutches, so it doesn't have to rely on friction to drive the output. An article and sketch of this variation can be found here
Many IVTs result from the combination of a CVT with a planetary gear system which enforces an IVT output shaft rotation speed which is equal to the difference between two other speeds within the IVT. This IVT configuration uses its CVT as a continuously variable regulator (CVR) of the rotation speed of any one of the three rotators of the planetary gear system (PGS). If two of the PGS rotator speeds are the input and output of the CVR, there is a setting of the CVR that results in the IVT output speed of zero. The maximum output/input ratio can be chosen from infinite practical possibilities through selection of additional input or output gear, pulley or sprocket sizes without affecting the zero output or the continuity of the whole system. The IVT is always engaged, even during its zero output adjustment.
IVTs can in some implementations offer better efficiency in the preferred range of operation when compared to other CVTs because most of the power flows through the planetary gear system and not the controlling CVR. Torque transmission capability can also be increased. Staging power splits is also possible for further increase in efficiency, torque transmission capability and better maintenance of efficiency over a wide gear ratio range.
An example of a true IVT is the Hydristor because the front unit connected to the engine can displace from zero to 27 cubic inches (440 cm3) per revolution forward and zero to −10 cubic inches (−160 cm3) per revolution reverse. The rear unit is capable of zero to 75 cubic inches (1,230 cm3) per revolution. However, whether this design enters production remains to be seen. Another example of a true IVT that has been put into recent production and which continues under commercial development is that of Torotrak.