Simple rubber belt (non-stretching fixed circumference manufactured using various highly durable and flexible materials) CVTs are commonly used in small motorized vehicles, where their mechanical simplicity and ease of use outweigh their comparative inefficiency. Nearly all snowmobiles, utility vehicles, golf carts and motor scooters use CVTs, typically the rubber belt or variable pulley variety. Many small tractors and self-propelled mowers for home and garden also use simple rubber belt CVT. Hydrostatic systems are more common on the larger units—the walk-behind self-propelled mowers are of the slipping belt variety.
Hydrostatic CVTs are common in small to medium-sized agricultural and earthmoving equipment. As the engines in these machines are typically run at constant power settings to provide hydraulic power or to power machinery, losses in mechanical efficiency are offset by enhanced operational efficiency, such as reduced forward-reverse shuttle times in earthmoving operations. Transmission output is varied to control both travel speed and direction. This is particularly beneficial in equipment designed to pivot or skid steer through differential power application as the required differential steering action can easily be supplied by independent CVTs, allowing steering to be accomplished without braking losses or loss of tractive effort and allowing the machine to pivot in place. In mowing or harvesting operations a CVT allows the forward speed of the tractor or combine harvester to be adjusted independently of the engine speed. This allows the operator to slow or accelerate as needed to accommodate variations in thickness of the crop.
CVTs have been used in aircraft electrical power generating systems since the 1950s and in Sports Car Club of America (SCCA) Formula 500 race cars since the early 1970s. Farm equipment, namely harvester combines, used variable belt drives as early as the 1950s, as well. CVTs were banned from Formula 1 in 1994 because of concerns that the best-funded teams would dominate if they managed to create a viable F1 CVT. More recently, CVT systems have been developed for go-karts and have proven to increase performance and engine life expectancy. The Tomcar range of off-road vehicles also utilizes the CVT system.
Some drill presses and milling machines contain a pulley-based CVT where the output shaft has a pair of manually adjustable conical pulley halves through which a wide drive belt from the motor loops. The pulley on the motor, however, is usually fixed in diameter, or may have a series of given-diameter steps to allow a selection of speed ranges. A handwheel on the drill press, marked with a scale corresponding to the desired machine speed, is mounted to a reduction gearing system for the operator to precisely control the width of the gap between the pulley halves. This gap width thus adjusts the gearing ratio between the motor's fixed pulley and the output shaft's variable pulley, changing speed of the chuck. A tensioner pulley is implemented in the belt transmission to take up or release the slack in the belt as the speed is altered. In most cases, the speed must be changed with the motor running.
CVTs should be distinguished from power-sharing transmissions (PSTs), as used in newer hybrid cars, such as the Toyota Prius, Highlander and Camry, the Nissan Altima, and newer-model Ford Escape Hybrid SUVs. CVT technology uses only one input from a prime mover and delivers variable output speeds and torque, whereas PST technology uses two prime mover inputs and varies the ratio of their contributions to output speed and power. These transmissions are fundamentally different.
Some vehicles that offer CVT are the Chrysler Pacifica hybrid, the Ford C-MAX hybrid, the Mitsubishi Lancer, the Dodge Caliber, the Toyota Corolla, the Scion iQ, the Honda Insight, Fit, CR-Z hybrid, CR-V, Capa, Honda Civic, Honda Accord, the Nissan Tiida/Versa (SL, SV, and Note S Plus or higher models), Cube, Juke, Sentra, Altima, Maxima, 2013 1.2 Note, Rogue, X-Trail, Murano, Pathfinder, Sunny and the non-Mexican Micra, the Jeep Patriot and Compass, the Suzuki SX4 S-Cross, and the Subaru Forester, Impreza, Legacy, Outback and Crosstrek, Suzuki Kizashi, Toyota Allion 2009 onwards, Toyota Premio 2009 onwards, Toyota Avalon, Toyota Mark X, etc.