Light front quantization is a rigorous alternative due to Paul Dirac to the usual second quantization method (instant-form method). Causality and frame-independence (Poincaré invariance) are explicit, contrary to quantization in the instant-form method. The light-front vacuum state is defined as the eigenstate of lowest invariant mass.
Vacuum fluctuations do not appear in the Light-Front vacuum since all particles have positive momenta p+= p0+p3. Since p+ is conserved, particles cannot couple to the light front vacuum since it has p+=0.
These features make the quantum field theory vacuum essentially trivial, with no vacuum dynamics such as condensate (i.e. vacuum expectation value). In contrast, vacuum fluctuations appear in the vacuum of the ordinary instant-form (the lowest energy eigenstate of the instant-form Hamiltonian), but the physical effects depend on the arbitrary choice of Lorentz frame. This fact and the violation of causality indicate that the instant-form vacuum cannot represent of the physical vacuum.
While the features of the LF vacuum have been known for a long time, in 2011, Stanley Brodsky and Robert Shrock showed that the absence of condensates implies that in the Standard Model of Particle Physics, there is no contribution from QED, Weak interactions and QCD to the cosmological constant. It is thus predicted to be zero in a flat space-time. This was later validated and developed, by other prominent QCD theorists.
In the case of the Higgs mechanism, the usual Higgs vacuum expectation value in the instant-form vacuum is replaced by a constant scalar background field - a "zero mode" with kμ=0. The phenomenological predictions are unchanged using the LF formalism. Since the Higgs zero mode has no energy or momentum density, it does not contribute to the cosmological constant.
The small non-zero value of the cosmological constant must then be attributed to other mechanisms; for example a slight curvature of the shape of the universe (which is not excluded within 0.4% (as of 2017)) could modify the Higgs field zero-mode, thereby possibly producing a non-zero contribution to the cosmological constant.