The biblical cosmology is that of the ancient Near East: a flat Earth, heavens above, and the underworld below. Surrounding this were the "waters of chaos", the cosmic sea, home to mythic monsters defeated and slain by God (Exodus 20:4 warns against making an image "of anything that is in the waters under the Earth"). There were waters above the Earth, and so the solid bowl-shaped firmament of the second day was necessary to keep them from flooding the world. Young Earth creationists deny this, and hold that the bible describes a spherical Earth hanging in empty space, and most teach that the Earth goes round the sun (although the Association for Biblical Astronomy holds that the Earth is stationary and the sun moves around it). This is the standard modern scientific picture of the cosmos, but its elements are comparatively recent - the fact that the Earth circles the sun, for example, was only established in the 16th century, and the existence of separate galaxies not bound to our own was confirmed only in the 1920s. Creationist cosmologies thus credit the biblical authors with cosmological knowledge well in advance of their contemporaries in the ancient world.
The universe has no edge; it is not known whether it is finite or infinite, but we can only observe a finite amount of it (the observable universe). It has no centre: the Big Bang should not be visualised as an explosion outwards from a central point, but as an equal expansion at all points within itself. This expansion still continues: a useful analogy for the shape of the universe is therefore the surface of an expanding balloon, on which every point is moving away from every other point (but bearing in mind that the universe has at least three dimensions, while the skin of the balloon has only two). Creationist cosmologies have no single position on these questions, but there seems to be a bias towards a universe which is curved rather than flat, bounded rather than unbounded, and finite rather than infinite. Most strikingly, there seems to be a common hypothesis that the universe has a centre and the Earth is at or near it (Galactocentrism): "A creationist cosmology requires a finite universe that is most likely spherically symmetric about our galaxy ."