The following is a full list of known crew members who sailed on the maiden voyage of the RMS Titanic.
Included in this list are the nine-member Guarantee Group and the eight members of the ship's band, who were given passenger accommodations and treated as both passengers and crew. They are also included in the list of passengers on board RMS Titanic.
Crew members are colour-coded, indicating whether they were saved or perished.     The crew member did not survive     The crew member survived
Survivors are listed with the lifeboat from which they were known to be rescued by the RMS Carpathia, on 15 April 1912.
Victims whose remains were recovered after the sinking are listed with a superscript next to the body number, indicating the recovery vessel:
MB – CS Mackay-Bennett (bodies 1–306)
M – CS Minia (bodies 307–323)
MM – CGS Montmagny (bodies 326–329)
A – SS Algerine (body 330)
O – RMS Oceanic (bodies 331–333)
I – SS Ilford (body 334)
OT – SS Ottawa (body 335)
Numbers 324 and 325 were unused, and the six bodies buried at sea by the Carpathia also went unnumbered. Several recovered bodies were unidentifiable and thus not all numbers are matched with a person.
Upon recovery, the bodies of 209 identified and unidentified victims of the sinking were brought to Halifax, Nova Scotia. Of those, 121 were taken to the non-denominational Fairview Lawn Cemetery, 59 were repatriated, 19 were buried in the Roman Catholic Mount Olivet Cemetery, and 10 were taken to the Jewish Baron de Hirsch Cemetery. The bodies of the remaining recovered victims were either delivered to family members or buried at sea.
It should be noted that the "Hometown" field may be misleading. Many crew had secondary or temporary addresses in Southampton, which they gave when signing the crew list, and others may have only recently relocated there. In particular, the number of crew from Merseyside is understated; for example, Chief Engineer Joseph Bell and Chief Steward Andrew Latimer lived with their families in the Liverpool area. Dr. Alan Scarth, in his book Titanic and Liverpool, identifies 115 crew members with close connections to the city, of whom only 28 survived.