Coriolis flowmeters have been around for more than 30 years and are preferred in process industries such as chemical and food and beverage. Coriolis technology offers accuracy and reliability in measuring material flow, and is often hailed as among the best flow measurement technologies due to direct mass flow, fluid density, temperature, and precise calculated volume flow rates. Coriolis meters do not have any moving parts and provide long term stability, repeatability, and reliability. Because they are direct mass flow measurement devices, Coriolis meters can handle the widest range of fluids from gases to heavy liquids and are not impacted by viscosity or density changes that often effect velocity based technologies (PD, Turbine, Ultrasonic). With the widest flow range capability of any flow technology, Coriolis can be sized for low pressure drop. This combined with the fact that they are not flow profile dependent helps eliminate the need for straight runs and flow conditioning which enables custody transfer systems to be designed with minimal pressure drop.
It has to be mentioned that any measurement instrument that relies on one measurement principle only will show a higher measurement uncertainty under two-phase flow conditions. Conventional measurement principles, like positive displacement, turbine meters, orifice plates will seemingly continue to measure, but will not be able to inform the user about the occurrence of two-phase flow. Yet modern principles based on the Coriolis effect or ultrasonic flow measurement will inform the user by means of diagnostic functions.
Flow is measured using Coriolis meters by analyzing the changes in the Coriolis force of a flowing substance. The force is generated in a mass moving within a rotating frame of reference. An angular, outward acceleration, which is factored with linear velocity is produced due to the rotation. With a fluid mass, the Coriolis force is proportional to the mass flow rate of that fluid.
A Coriolis meter has two main components: an oscillating flow tube equipped with sensors and drivers, and an electronic transmitter that controls the oscillations, analyzes the results, and transmits the information. The Coriolis principle for flow measurement requires the oscillating section of a rotating pipe to be exploited. Oscillation produces the Coriolis force, which traditionally is sensed and analyzed to determine the rate of flow. Modern coriolis meters utilize the phase difference measured at each end of the oscillating pipe.