A dashpot is a common component in a door closer to prevent it from slamming shut. A spring applies force to close the door, and the dashpot forces fluid to flow through an orifice between reservoirs (the orifice is often adjustable), which slows the motion of the door.
Consumer electronics often use dashpots where it is undesirable for a media access door or control panel to suddenly pop open when the door latch is released. The dashpot provides a steady, gentle motion until the access door has fully opened.
Dashpots are commonly used in dampers and shock absorbers. The hydraulic cylinder in an automobile shock absorber is a dashpot. They are also used on carburetors, where the return of the throttle lever is cushioned just before the throttle fully closes, then is allowed to fully close slowly to reduce emissions. The British SU carburettor's main piston carries a stepped needle. This needle is held in the fuel flow orifice. The manifold vacuum causes this piston to rise allowing more fuel into the airflow. The SU's dashpot has a fixed hydraulic piston, damping the main piston as it moves upward. A valve in the piston disables the damping as the main piston returns.
Large forces and high speeds can be controlled by dashpots. For example, they are used to arrest the steam catapults on aircraft carrier decks.
Relays can be made to have a long delay by utilizing a piston filled with fluid that is allowed to escape slowly. Electrical switchgear may use dashpots in their overcurrent sensing mechanism to reduce reaction speed to brief events, thus making them less sensitive to false-triggering during transients whilst still remaining sensitive to sustained overloads. Another use is for delaying the closing or opening of an electrical circuit. Such a dashpot timer might be used for example for timed staircase lighting.
Anti-stall mechanisms in internal combustion engines are aimed to prevent stalling of the engine at low rpm. Anti-stall mechanisms use dashpots to arrest the final closing movement of the throttle.