One means of exchange of angular momentum between the atmosphere and the non gaseous parts of the earth is evaporation and precipitation. Massive quantities of water are in continual flux between the oceans and the atmosphere. As the mass of water (vapour) rises its rotation must slow due to conservation of angular momentum. Equally when if falls as rain, its rate of rotation will increase to conserve angular momentum. Any net global transfer of water mass from oceans to the atmosphere or the opposite implies a change in the speed of rotation of the solid/liquid Earth which will be reflected in LOD.
Observational evidence shows that there is no significant time delay between the change of AAM and its corresponding change of LOD for periods longer than about 10 days. This implies a strong coupling between atmosphere and solid Earth due to surface friction with a time constant of about 7 days, the spin-down time of the Ekman layer. This spin-down time is the characteristic time for the transfer of atmospheric axial angular momentum to Earth's surface and vice versa.
The zonal wind-component on the ground, which is most effective for the transfer of axial angular momentum between Earth and atmosphere, is the component describing rigid rotation of the atmosphere. The zonal wind of this component has the amplitude u at the equator relative to the ground, where u > 0 indicates superrotation and u < 0 indicates retrograde rotation with respect to the solid Earth. All other wind terms merely redistribute the AAM with latitude, an effect that cancels out when averaged over the globe.
Surface friction allows the atmosphere to 'pick up' angular momentum from Earth in the case of retrograde rotation or release it to Earth in the case of superrotation. Averaging over longer time scales, no exchange of AAM with the solid Earth takes place. Earth and atmosphere are decoupled. This implies that the ground level zonal wind-component responsible for rigid rotation must be zero on the average. Indeed, the observed meridional structure of the climatic mean zonal wind on the ground shows westerly winds (from the west) in middle latitudes beyond about ± 30o latitude and easterly winds (from the east) in low latitudes—the trade winds—as well as near the poles (prevailing winds). The atmosphere picks up angular momentum from Earth at low and high latitudes and transfers the same amount to Earth at middle latitudes.
Any short term fluctuation of the rigidly rotating zonal wind-component is then accompanied by a corresponding change in LOD. In order to estimate the order of magnitude of that effect, one may consider the total atmosphere to rotate rigidly with velocity u (in m/s) without surface friction. Then this value is related to the corresponding change of the length of day Δτ (in milliseconds) as
u ≃ 2.7 Δτ
The annual component of the change of the length of day of Δτ ≃ 0.34 ms corresponds then to a superrotation of u ≃ 0.9 m/s, and the semiannual component of Δτ ≃ 0.29 ms to u ≃ 0.8 m/s.