If a plasma is cooled and under increasing pressure, it will eventually not be possible to compress the plasma any further. This is by the Pauli exclusion principle, which states that two fermions cannot share the same quantum state. When in this highly compressed state, since there is no extra space for any particles, a particle's location is extremely defined. Since the locations of the particles of a highly compressed plasma have very low uncertainty, their momentum is extremely uncertain. This is due to the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, ΔpΔx ≥ ħ/2, where Δp is the uncertainty in the particle's momentum and Δx is the uncertainty in position. Therefore, even though the plasma is cold, such particles must on average be moving very fast. This leads to the conclusion that, in order to compress an object into a very small space, tremendous force is required to control its particles' momentum.
Unlike a classical ideal gas, whose pressure is proportional to its temperature (P = NkT/V, where P is pressure, V is the volume, N is the number of particles—typically atoms or molecules—k is Boltzmann's constant, and T is temperature), the pressure exerted by degenerate matter depends only weakly on its temperature. In particular, the pressure remains nonzero even at absolute zero temperature. At relatively low densities, the pressure of a fully degenerate gas is given by P = K(N/V)5/3, where K depends on the properties of the particles making up the gas. At very high densities, where most of the particles are forced into quantum states with relativistic energies, the pressure is given by P = K(N/V)4/3, where K again depends on the properties of the particles making up the gas.
All matter experiences both normal thermal pressure and degeneracy pressure, but in commonly encountered gases, thermal pressure dominates so much that degeneracy pressure can be ignored. Likewise, degenerate matter still has normal thermal pressure, but at extremely high densities, the degeneracy pressure usually dominates.
Exotic examples of degenerate matter include neutron degenerate matter, strange matter, metallic hydrogen and white dwarf matter. Degeneracy pressure contributes to the pressure of conventional solids, but these are not usually considered to be degenerate matter because a significant contribution to their pressure is provided by electrical repulsion of atomic nuclei and the screening of nuclei from each other by electrons. In metals it is useful to treat the conduction electrons alone as a degenerate, free electron gas while the majority of the electrons are regarded as occupying bound quantum states. This contrasts with degenerate matter that forms the body of a white dwarf, where all the electrons would be treated as occupying free particle momentum states.