Germline modification has been around since the 1980s, as there have been successful animal trials dating back to that time. In order for germline modification to be successful, medical professionals must know how to introduce a gene into the patient's’ cell and the germline so that it will be transferred subsequent generations and still maintain the proper functionality. The way in which genes are integrated into the DNA is what determines that difference between germline modification and somatic cell modification. In order to be transferred to subsequent generations, these changes need to be carried out through the development of germ cells. Changes in the germline result in permanent and heritable changes to the DNA. While amplification of positive effects would occur, there is also the risk that amplification of possible negative effects would also occur. Since the results are generational, it is more complicated to study the long-term effects and therefore it is not a simple task to figure out if the benefits of germline modification outweigh the harm. Allowing families to have the ability to design their children and select for desirable traits is another major concern that germline modification presents.
Germline modification can be accomplished through different techniques that focus on modification of the germinal epithelium, germ cells, or the fertilized egg. Most of the techniques include transporting transgenes and then the transgenes are integrated with the DNA of the zygote. After integration, the transgene becomes a stable and functioning portion of the host’s genome. One technique involves a specific sequence of cloned DNA being inserted into the fertilized egg using the microinjection technique. The sequence is inserted directly into the pronucleus. The second technique uses the transfection process. Stem cells obtained from the embryo during the blastocysts stage are modified, combined with naked DNA, and the resulting cell is reinserted into the embryo that is developing. The third technique focuses on carrying DNA into the embryo by using retroviruses.