Salviati starts by repeating that Aristotle would be changing his opinions if he saw what they were seeing. "It is the followers of Aristotle who have crowned him with authority, not he who has usurped or appropriated it to himself."
There is one supreme motion—that by which the sun, moon, planets and fixed stars appear to be moved from east to west in the space of 24 hours. This may as logically belong to the earth alone as to the rest of the universe. Aristotle and Ptolemy, who understood this, do not argue against any other motion than this diurnal one.
Motion is relative: the position of the sacks of grain on a ship can be identical at the end of the voyage despite the movement of the ship. Why should we believe that nature moves all these extremely large bodies with inconceivable velocities rather than simply moving the moderately sized earth? If the earth is removed from the picture, what happens to all the movement?
The movement of the skies from east to west is the opposite of all the other motions of the heavenly bodies which are from west to east; making the earth rotate brings it into line with all the others. Although Aristotle argues that circular motions are not contraries, they could still lead to collisions.
The great orbits of the planets take longer than the shorter: Saturn and Jupiter take many years, Mars two, whereas the moon takes only a month. Jupiter's moons take even less. This is not changed if the earth rotates every day, but if the earth is stationary then we suddenly find that the sphere of the fixed stars rotates in 24 hours. Given the distances, that would more reasonably be thousands of years.
In addition some of these stars have to travel faster than others: if the Pole Star was precisely at the axis, then it would be entirely stationary whereas those of the equator have unimaginable speed. The solidity of this supposed sphere is incomprehensible. Make the earth the primum mobile and the need for this extra sphere disappears.

They consider three main objections to the motion of the earth: that a falling body would be left behind by the earth and thus fall far to the west of its point of release; that a cannonball fired to the west would similarly fly much further than one fired to the east; and that a cannonball fired vertically would also land far to the west. Salviati shows that these do not take account of the impetus of the cannon.
He also points out that attempting to prove that the earth doesn't move by using vertical fall commits the logical fault of paralogism (assuming what is to be proved), because if the earth is moving then it is only in appearance that it is falling vertically; in fact it is falling at a slant, as happens with a cannonball rising through the cannon (illustrated).
In rebutting a work which claims that a ball falling from the moon would take six days to arrive, the odd-number rule is introduced: a body falling 1 unit in an interval would fall 3 units in the next interval, 5 units in the subsequent one, etc. This gives rise to the rule by which the distance fallen is according to the square of the time. Using this he calculates the time is really little more than 3 hours. He also points out that density of the material doesn't make much difference: a lead ball might only accelerate twice as fast as one of cork.
In fact, a ball falling from such a height wouldn't fall behind but ahead of the vertical because the rotational motion would be in ever-decreasing circles. What makes the earth move is similar to whatever moves Mars or Jupiter and is the same as that which pulls the stone to earth. Calling it gravity doesn't explain what it is.