In 2016, in collaboration with Prof. Friedemann Freund (with John Scoville) at NASA Ames and GeoCosmo, Sornette (with Guy Ouillon) has launched the Global Earthquake Forecasting Project (GEFS) as an unprecedented collaborative effort to provide significant advances in the field of earthquake prediction. This project is originally rooted in the rigorous theoretical and experimental solid-state physics of Prof. Friedemann Freund, whose theory is able to explain the whole spectrum of electromagnetic type phenomena that have been reported before large earthquakes for decades, if not centuries: when submitting rocks to significant stresses, electrons and positive holes are activated; the latter flow to less stressed domains of the material thus generating large-scale electric currents. Those in turn induce local geoelectric and geomagnetic anomalies, stimulated infrared emission, air ionization, increase levels of ozone and carbon monoxide. All those fluctuations are currently measured using ground stations or remote sensing technologies. There are innumerable reports of heterogeneous types of precursory phenomena ranging from emission of electromagnetic waves from ultralow frequency (ULF) to visible (VIS) and near-infrared (NIR) light, electric field and magnetic field anomalies of various kinds (see below), all the way to unusual animal behavior, which has been reported again and again.
Space and ground anomalies preceding and/or contemporaneous to earthquakes include: (Satellite Component) 1. Thermal Infrared (TIR) anomalies 2. Total Electron Content (TEC) anomalies 3. Ionospheric tomography 4. Ionospheric electric field turbulences 5. Atmospheric Gravity Waves (AGW) 6. CO release from the ground 7. Ozone formation at ground level 8. VLF detection of air ionization 9. Mesospheric lightning 10. Lineaments in the VIS-NIR;
Ground Station Component: 1. Magnetic field variations 2. ULF emission from within the Earth crust 3. Tree potentials and ground potentials 4. Soil conductivity changes 5. Groundwater chemistry changes 6. Trace gas release from the ground 7. Radon emanation from the ground 8. Air ionization at the ground surface 9. Sub-ionospheric VLF/ELF propagation 10. Nightglow
These precursory signals are intermittent and seem not to occur systematically before every major earthquake. Researchers have not been able to explain and exploit them satisfactorily, but never together. Unfortunately, there is no worldwide repository for such data, and those databases are most often under-exploited using too simplistic analyses, or neglecting cross-correlations among them (most often because such data are acquired and possessed by distinct and competing institutions). The GEFS stands as a revolutionary initiative with the following goals: (i) initiate collaborations with many datacenters across the world to unify competences; (ii) propose a collaborative platform (InnovWiki, developed at ETH Zürich) to develop a mega repository of data and tools of analysis; (iii) develop and test rigorously real-time, high-dimension multivariate algorithms to predict earthquakes (location, time and magnitude) using all available data.