Intra and Inter Laboratories results can differ due to variation in the experimental factors such as the protocol used, housing, temperature, light/dark cycle and the duration of study.
Laboratories temperature which are usually (18-22 °C) are lower than the thermoneutrality of the model organism like mice which are about 30 °C. That can introduce hyperphagia in the organism in effort of increasing their metabolism to generate heat energy for the body. This level of thermal stress can also have unaccounted effects on the organism's other metabolic processes.

Furthermore, the spatial confinements in housing organisms can affect the brain chemistry in social creatures like mice and rats, making them more vulnerable to slower brain development and abnormalities due to the lack of social interactions. The psychological effects can introduce further discrepancy in the studies that makes it difficult to render proper data and further hinders the possibility of recapitulating such experiments in humans.
Rodents are nocturnal and are mostly feeding at night, in their natural habitat. The changes in the light/dark cycle of laboratories can alter their circadian rhythm which can affect their metabolism. Besides that several studies used genetically modified mouse models that have decreased circadian rhythmicity gene. These cases have resulted in the increase of metabolic syndrome in the mouse models as well as resulted in obesity. The change in the phenotype can be a result of genetic modification of circadian clock gene, HFD, disruption of the circadian cycle by changes in light and dark cycle or can be due to the combination of all the factors. Further research is required to find the exact cause.
The cause of Diabetes mellitus type 2 (T2D) in humans are far more complicated than the sole consumption of High Fat Diet (HFD). The mental, emotional and cultural factors along with insulin resistance and hyperphagia are known to increase the occurrence of T2D in humans. However, T2D in model organisms are introduced via surgery of partial/ whole pancreas, or using chemicals such as Streptozotocin. Streptozotocin inhibits the ability of pancreatic β cells to produce insulin, and depending on the dosage used, the result can be partial or absolute inhibition. It can also interfere with other cell signallingpathways as well as affects the content of certain isozymes in organs like liver, brain and kidneys. The lack of proper representation of the undertaking of the experiment can introduce T2D, but fails to reflect the mechanism through which these disease takes place in humans.