Many phenomena in various science fields are mathematically expressed by using the well-known evolution equations. The diffusion equation is one of them, and mathematically corresponds to the Markov process in relation to the normal distribution rule. In physics, the motion of diffusion particles corresponds to the well-known Brownian motion satisfying the parabolic law. It is widely accepted that the Brown problem is a general term of investigating subjects in various science fields relevant to the Markov process, such as material science, information science, life science, social science, and so on. The extended diffusion equations are used for various sciences fields. In that case, they sometimes have a sink and source of their concerned elements, for example, such as a local equilibrium relation between native defects in silicon crystal in material science or between predation and prey in the life science. We must then solve a system of diffusion equations. In the following, however, we discuss the fundamental diffusion equation of the so-called Fick’s diffusion equation in relation to material science.
The heat equation proposed by Fourier in 1822 has been applied to investigating a temperature distribution in materials. In 1827, so-called Brownian motion was found, where the self-diffusion of water is visualized by the motion of pollen micro particles. Nevertheless, Brownian motion had not been recognized as a diffusion problem until the Einstein theory of Brownian motion in 1905. Although it was a typical diffusion problem, Fick applied the heat equation to the diffusion phenomena in 1855.
In accordance with the industrial requirement, solid materials such as alloys, semiconductors, multilayer materials, and so on, have been widely fabricated. The heat treatment is indispensable for their fabrication processes then. The migration of particles in a solid material is caused by the heat treatment. In relation to the migration of their particles, the diffusion problems of various solid materials have been widely investigated, although the diffusion equation was mainly applied to problems of liquid material in an early stage after Fick’s proposition.
Gauss’s divergence theorem shows that the diffusion equation is valid in the solid, liquid, and gas states in every material as a material conservation law, if there are no sinks or sources in the system. It also shows that the corresponding Fick’s first law to the Fick’s second law is mathematically incomplete without a constant diffusion flux relevant to the Brownian motion in the localized space. The constant diffusion flux is indispensable for understanding the self-diffusion mechanism. The self-diffusion mechanism itself was not directly investigated, although it had been indirectly investigated by behavior of impurity diffusion in a pure material as shown in the Einstein’s Brown theory and the Langevin equation.
We found that the diffusivity of diffusion equation depends generally on the concentration of diffusion particles. In that case, the diffusion equation becomes a nonlinear partial differential equation, and the mathematical solution is almost impossible, even if it is a case of the time and one dimension space coordinate . In accordance with the parabolic law, Boltzmann transformed the diffusion equation of, which is a nonlinear partial differential equation, into a nonlinear ordinary differential equation of in 1894. Since then, however, the Boltzmann transformation equation had not been mathematically solved until recently, although Matano empirically used it for analyzing interdiffusion problems in the metallurgy field.
Here, the analytical method of diffusion equation, which is extremely superior in calculation to the existing analytical method such as the integral transformation method of Fourier or Laplace and/or the variable separation method, was thus established in the parabolic space.
In 1947, Kirkendall found that an inert marker set at a point in a binary alloy moves from the initial sate point after the diffusion treatment. The phenomena are so called Kirkendall effect and it was considered that we cannot understand it from the existing theory of binary interdiffusion in those days. As a result, a new concept of intrinsic diffusion was then introduced for understanding the Kirkendall effect in the interdiffusion problems. Based on the intrinsic diffusion concept, Darken derived a relation between an interdiffusion coefficient and intrinsic diffusion coefficients in a binary interdiffusion in 1948. At present, however, it is revealed that the so-called Darken equation itself is mathematically wrong in the derivation process. Although the concentration of diffusion particles is a real quantity in physics, the temperature is a thermodynamic state quantity. As far as the shape of heat conduction material is unchangeable during a thermal treatment, the coordinate system of heat equation set in a material is a fixed one, since the coordinate system is not influenced by variations of the material internal structure. On the other hand, strictly speaking, the coordinate system of diffusion equation set in the diffusion field (solvent) is a moving one, since the origin of coordinate system is generally influenced by such variations.
When Fick proposed the diffusion equation, the Gauss divergence theorem had been already reported in 1840. Nevertheless, the problem of coordinate system of diffusion equation had not been mathematically investigated in accordance with the divergence theorem until recently. In general, however, it is indispensable for understanding the diffusion problems to discuss their coordinate systems, since it is, strictly speaking, considered that the diffusion particles, solvent particles and also the diffusion region space simultaneously move against the experimentation system in the diffusion region outside.
Recently, the diffusion equation was thus mathematically investigated in accordance with the divergence theorem and the coordinate transformation theory. As a result, the diffusion flux should be determined by taking account of the concerned coordinate system of diffusion equation. Using the corresponding diffusion flux to the concerned coordinate system of diffusion equation for interdiffusion, one way diffusion, impurity diffusion and self-diffusion, we found that they are uniformly discussed and the foundation of diffusion problems is included in interdiffusion problems. The interdiffusion theory of an elements system applicable to every material was thus reasonably established. In the analysis of interdiffusion problems, the only difference between a binary system and an N elements system is whether the solvent material is one element or elements.
The coordinate transformation theory reveals that the Kirkendall effect is caused by a shift between the coordinate systems of diffusion equation like the Doppler effect relevant to a wave equation is caused by a shift between the fixed coordinate system and the moving one. Further, it was also found that the concept of intrinsic diffusion is an illusion in the diffusion history. All physical information in the given diffusion system is incorporated into the diffusivity. If we can know a diffusivity behavior in the given diffusion equation, the mathematical solution and/or numerical one at least is possible. In the diffusion problems, it is thus extremely dominant to know the diffusivity behavior. The diffusivity is defined by an interaction between a diffusion particle and the diffusion field near the diffusion particle itself. This indicates that the diffusivity should be essentially investigated in the quantum mechanics, since the behavior of a micro particle should be investigated by analyzing the Schrodinger equation.
From applying the diffusion equation to a problem of diffusion elementary process, the equation was reasonably derived. It was revealed that the diffusivity corresponds to the angular momentum operator in the quantum mechanics. As a result, the universal expression of diffusivity, which is applicable to every material in an arbitrary thermodynamic state, was obtained as one with the proportionality constant composed of the product of Planck constant and Avogadro constant . It was also found that the well-known material wave relation proposed by de Broglie in 1923, which is the most fundamental one in materials science, is obtained from a relation between the given diffusivity expressions. This gives evidence for the theory discussed here.