Vehicles using engines equipped with Digifant fuel injection typically operated both efficiently and smoothly when new but suffered from a number of issues as the car aged, even by a few months. Digifant sensors & other components, especially the ECU itself were remarkably sensitive to poor electrical grounding, without a reliable ground signal to reference, the system was vulnerable to errors and malfunction. In the 1980's and 1990's many Volkswagen / Audi designs did not incorporate sufficient engine compartment grounding, and when the car's engine compartment became soiled with dirt, oil & road salts from several months / years of use, the fuel injection system would fail in often inexplicable ways. Backfiring, stalls & other poor running were all too common. Later versions were improved by providing multiple grounding paths, but the early Digifant systems suffered poor service reputations.
Most of driveability issues can be traced back to a few issues:
Bad ECM earth/ground
Bad o2/lambda sensor earth/ground
Faulty Engine Coolant Temperature sensor (ECT)
The engine coolant temperature sensor is located in the coolant flange,(under the distributor on the Polo Fox Coupe) on the front of the cylinder head (on transverse-engine vehicles). The bad earth/ground can be traced to an essential ground strap on the front upper transmission bolt. Without this, the ECU tends to earth/ground elsewhere, causing a specific trace to burn out on the circuit board and killing the ECU. This causes the injectors to stay open constantly, flooding the engine.

Common issues that indicate a failed engine coolant temperature sensor are:
Vehicle idles poorly
Engine sputters, might stall
Higher than normal fuel consumption
The part number for this sensor is '025 906 041 A' (always check with your Volkswagen dealer for the most updated part number). The resistance of this unit is approximately 3.2 Kohm at 10 degrees C. If it measures open circuit this will explain erratic idle and throttle speeds especially when the engine is cold.
When replacing this sensor, it is important to also replace the clip that holds it in position ('032 121 142') and the O-ring ('N 903 168 02').
Once the new sensor has been installed, start the engine and disconnect the blue coolant temperature sensor. Rev the engine through 3,000 rpm three times, each time allowing the throttle to close completely. This clears the Digifant ECM fault memory.