Dislocation creep takes place due to the movement of dislocations through a crystal lattice. Each time a dislocation moves through a crystal, part of the crystal moves one lattice point along a plane, relative to the rest of the crystal. The plane that separates both parts and along which the movement takes place is called a slip plane. To allow the movement, all ionic bonds along the plane have to be broken. If all bonds were broken at once, this would require so much energy that dislocation creep would only in theory be possible. When it is assumed that the movement takes place step by step, the breaking of bonds is immediately followed by the creation of new ones and the energy required is much lower. Calculations of molecular dynamics and analysis of deformed materials have shown that deformation creep can be an important factor in deformation processes, under certain circumstances.
By moving a dislocation step by step through a crystal lattice a linear lattice defect is created between parts of the crystal lattice, which is called a dislocation. Two types of dislocations exist. Edge dislocations form the edge of an extra layer of atoms inside the crystal lattice. Screw dislocations form a line along which the crystal lattice jumps one lattice point. In both cases the dislocation line forms a linear defect through the crystal lattice, the crystal can be perfect on all sides of the line.
Both edge and screw dislocations move (slip) in directions parallel to their Burgers vector. This means edge dislocations move in directions perpendicular to their dislocation lines and screw dislocations move in directions parallel to their dislocation lines. In both cases this causes a part of the crystal to move relative to other parts. Meanwhile the dislocation itself moves further on along a glide plane. The crystal system of the material (mineral or metal) determines how many glide planes are possible, and in which orientations. The orientation of the differential stress then determines which glide planes are active and which are not. The Von Mises criterion states that to deform a material, movement along at least five different glide planes is required. A dislocation will not always be a straight line and can thus move along more than one glide plane. Where the orientation of the dislocation line changes, a screw dislocation can continue as an edge dislocation and vice versa.
The length of the displacement in the crystal caused by the movement of the dislocation is called the Burgers vector. It equals the distance between two atoms or ions in the crystal lattice. Therefore each material has its own characteristic Burgers vectors for each glide plane.