Dislocations are imperfections in a crystal lattice, that from a thermodynamic point of view increase the amount of free energy in the system. Therefore, parts of a crystal that have more dislocations will be relatively unstable. By recrystallisation, the crystal can heal itself. Recovery of the crystal structure can also take place when two dislocations with opposite displacement meet each other.
A dislocation that has been brought to a halt by an obstacle (a point defect) can overcome the obstacle and start moving again by a process called dislocation climb. For dislocation climb to occur, vacancies have to be able to move through the crystal. When a vacancy arrives at the place where the dislocation is stuck it can cause the dislocation to climb out of its glide plane, after which the point defect is no longer in its way. Dislocation climb is therefore dependent from the velocity of vacancy diffusion. As with all diffusion processes, this is highly dependent on the temperature. At higher temperatures dislocations will more easily be able to move around obstacles. For this reason, many hardened materials become exponentially weaker at higher temperatures.
At low stresses, materials with a low initial dislocation density may creep by dislocation climb alone, known as Harper–Dorn creep. This creep behavior is characterized by a linear dependence on stress, an independence of grain size, and activation energies that are typically close to those expected for lattice diffusion.
To reduce the free energy in the system, dislocations can tend to concentrate themselves in certain zones, so that other regions will stay free of dislocations. This leads to the formation of 'dislocation walls', planes in a crystal where dislocations localise. Edge dislocations form so called tilt walls, while screw dislocations form twist walls. In both cases the increasing localisation of dislocations in the wall will increase the angle between the orientation of the crystal lattice on both sides of the wall. This leads to the formation of subgrains. The process is called subgrain rotation (SGR) and can eventually lead to the formation of new grains when the dislocation wall becomes a new grain boundary.