The Moroccan locust lives in arid areas between 500 and 1000 metres above sea level. It breeds in undisturbed soil and does not reproduce in arable fields. The optimum rainfall for development in the months from March to May is one hundred millimetres. If the spring is unusually hot and precipitation is low, and especially if it is the second dry spring in succession, numbers of young locusts can increase dramatically. Mass outbreaks of nymphs occur and destroy the vegetation where they hatch. From the second instar stage onwards, the hoppers aggregate and the population density can reach several thousand nymphs per square metre. The hoppers move downhill to fertile regions damaging crops as they go. Multiple generations can be present, and the numbers of adults can build up rapidly, reaching 300 individuals per square metre in extreme cases. Winged adults take flight en masse at low altitudes, travelling at eight to ten metres per second and may migrate sixty kilometres during the season. Numbers begin to diminish in June when the vegetation is also declining.
This locust has traditionally been considered a serious agricultural threat. Its large numbers, voracious appetite, ability to eat almost all forms of vegetation and ability to migrate in swarms make it a feared pest. However, outbreaks of swarming activity have diminished in recent years and in some areas the Moroccan locust has become rare. This is particularly noticeable in European countries where the species no longer seems to be an economic threat while in north Africa and parts of central Asia it still flourishes. These alterations in population dynamics may be due to a change in climatic conditions with a decrease in spring rainfall. A more important factor may be the increase of cropland at the expense of grassland, since the female needs undisturbed soil in which to deposit her eggs. At the other extreme, overgrazing and deforestation in some areas provide a favourable environment for the species to thrive and remain destructive.
In a study in Iran in 1956 it was found that outbreaks of locusts originated from just eight distinct areas. All these districts were in mountain foothills that had been forested or in other rolling foothills. In all cases the vegetation consisted of annual grasses or shrub steppe communities with annual grasses and dwarf shrubs. There was a good supply of green food in winter which increased the longevity and fertility of the females. Outside these districts, the Moroccan locust had solitary populations whereas inside them, in some years, the locust became gregarious. The locust needs firm, bare soil for egg laying and when they hatch, the nymphs move to progressively taller and denser vegetation. These districts principally had rainfall in winter and early spring, averaging 250 to 350 millimetres. The temperature averaged about 17 °C in the months immediately before and after egg laying. The sites were heavily grazed by sheep and goats, especially in winter. The conclusion of the study was that quite specific climate, vegetation, and topographical conditions were needed for breeding to take place.