In judo, players that end up in the L bracket can finish in third place at best. The winner of the W bracket will win the tournament, with the losing finalist finishing second. The other losers of the W bracket will end up in the L bracket, which will only be played to the minor stage of the final, resulting in two 3rd placed players. Thus, compared to double elimination, there is no major stage of the L Bracket final played, and there is no game between the winners of the W and L Brackets.
Another aspect of the system used in judo is that losers of the first round (of the W bracket) only advance to the L bracket if the player they lost to wins his or her second round match. If a player loses to a second round loser, they are eliminated from the tournament.
Another variant, called the (third-place) challenge, is used, particularly in scholastic wrestling. The winner of the L bracket may challenge the loser of the finals in the W bracket, if and only if the two contestants had not faced each other previously; if the challenger (the winner of the L bracket) wins, he is awarded second place, and the loser of the W final is dropped to third place. This system is used particularly where the top two places advance to a higher level of competition (example: advancement from a regional tournament to a state tournament).
Another is the balanced variant which is a bracket arrangement that is not strictly divided into two brackets based on number of losses. Players with different numbers of losses can play each other in any round. A goal of the variant is that no player sits idle for more than one round consecutively. The added complexity of the brackets is handled by using "if necessary" matches. The flexible approach allows practical bracket designs to be made for any number of competitors including odd numbers (9, 10, 11, 12, 13, etc.).
A possible alternative is a single-elimination format where each match is a best-of-5 or best-of-7 series. This format still allows a competitor to lose (perhaps multiple times) while still remaining eligible to win the tournament. Of course, having multiple games in each series also requires considerably more games to be conducted.
Another is the modified single elimination tournament which guarantees at least two games per competitor, but not necessarily two losses for elimination. The brackets are similar to the double elimination format, except the two finalists from the L bracket (each with one loss) face the two finalists from the W bracket (neither with a loss) in a single elimination semi-final and final.
The College World Series (a baseball tournament) has frequently tried to modify the double-elimination format to set up, if possible, a single championship game. Until 1988, the College World Series did this by adding an extra round to the L Bracket. What would be the L Bracket major semifinals (i.e. the round where the W Bracket semifinal losers dropped down) became the L Bracket quarterfinals. The winners would then progress to the L Bracket semifinals against the two participants in the W Bracket final (i.e. the WINNERS of the W Bracket semifinals drop down). This thus left open the possibility that the W Bracket champion would pick up a loss, albeit in the L Bracket semifinal. If, however, the W Bracket champion prevailed in the L Bracket semifinal, the same two-game final setup existed in effect, albeit not in practice ... for under the CWS pre-1988 version, the unbeaten W Bracket champion would be playing a once-beaten L Bracket opponent in the L Bracket final, with the winner to advance to play the unbeaten W Bracket champion in the finals (if necessary). The CWS subsequently broke up its eight-team field into two four-team double elimination tournaments, with the winners meeting in either a sudden-death or, currently, a best-of-three final.
A way to reduce the number of rounds is to do cross-bracket elimination in the last rounds. For instance, in a double-elimination tournament of eight teams, you could have both the winner and the loser of the W Bracket final join the third round of the L Bracket, the winner facing the lowest-seeded L Bracket team or crossing inversely how W Bracket semifinal losers are placed in L Bracket. If the W Bracket team wins, there will be two teams left and they will go straight to the finals (with the W Bracket team having a one-game advantage as usual). However, if the W Bracket team loses then three teams will still be in the tournament, all with one loss. Usually in the subsequent fifth round either the last W Bracket team that just lost has a bye round or the top seed remaining will have a bye, while the other two teams square off. This leaves two teams for a one-game final in the sixth and last round. Whether the W Bracket team wins or loses in round four, this cross-bracket procedure shortens an eight team double elimination tournament from 6–7 rounds to 5–6 rounds. This system also gives more odds to a single game final (75% of situations, instead the ordinary 50%)
The Little League World Series began using a modified double elimination bracket in 2011. Eight U.S. teams and eight international teams compete in respective double elimination formats until their respective championship games, which are single elimination. That is, irrespective of whether a team has one loss, or no losses, that team would be eliminated with a loss in either the U.S. or international championship game. The two respective champions then play a single elimination game for the World Series championship.