Double layers may be classified in the following ways:
Weak and strong double layers. The strength of a double layer is expressed as the ratio of the potential drop in comparison with the plasma's equivalent thermal energy, or in comparison with the rest mass energy of the electrons. A double layer is said to be strong if the potential drop within the layer is greater than the equivalent thermal energy of the plasma's components.
Relativistic or non-relativistic double layers. A double layer is said to be relativistic if the potential drop within the layer is comparable to the rest mass energy (~512KeV) of the electron. Double layers of such energy are to be found in laboratory experiments. The charge density is low between the two opposing potential regions and the double layer is similar to the charge distribution in a capacitor in that respect.
Current carrying double layers These double layers may be generated by current-driven plasma instabilities that amplify variations of the plasma density. One example of these instabilities is the Farley–Buneman instability, which occurs when the streaming velocity of electrons (basically the current density divided by the electron density) exceeds the electron thermal velocity of the plasma. It occurs in collisional plasmas having a neutral component, and is driven by drift currents.
Current-free double layers These occur at the boundary between plasma regions with different plasma properties. A plasma may have a higher electron temperature, and thermal velocity, on one side of a boundary layer than on the other. The same may apply for plasma densities. Charged particles exchanged between the regions may enable potential differences to be maintained between them locally. The overall charge density, as in all double layers, will be neutral.
Potential imbalance will be neutralised by electron (1&3) and ion (2&4) migration, unless the potential gradients are sustained by an external energy source. Under most laboratory situations, unlike outer space conditions, charged particles may effectively originate within the double layer, by ionization at the anode or cathode, and be sustained.
The figure shows the localised perturbation of potential produced by an idealised double layer consisting of two oppositely charged discs. The perturbation is zero at a distance from the double layer in every direction.
If an incident charged particle, such as a precipitating auroral electron, encounters such a static or quasistatic structure in the magnetosphere, provided that the particle energy exceeds half the electric potential difference within the double layer, it will pass through without any net change in energy. Incident particles with less energy than this will also experience no net change in energy but will undergo more overall deflection.

Four distinct regions of a double layer can be identified, which affect charged particles passing through it, or within it:
A positive potential side of the double layer where electrons are accelerated towards it;
A positive potential within the double layer where electrons are decelerated;
A negative potential within the double layer where electrons are decelerated; and
A negative potential side of the double layer where electrons are accelerated.
Double layers will tend to be transient in the magnetosphere, as any charge imbalance will become neutralised, unless there is a sustained external source of energy to maintain them as there is under laboratory conditions.