Thickness: The production of a double layer requires regions with a significant excess of positive or negative charge, that is, where quasi-neutrality is violated. In general, quasi-neutrality can only be violated on scales of the Debye length. The thickness of a double layer is of the order of ten Debye lengths, which is a few centimeters in the ionosphere, a few tens of meters in the interplanetary medium, and tens of kilometers in the intergalactic medium.
Electrostatic potential distribution: As described under double layer classification above, there are effectively four distinct regions of a double layer where incoming charged particles will be accelerated or decelerated along their trajectory . Within the double layer the two opposing charge distributions will tend to become neutralised by internal charged particle motion.
Particle flux: For non-relativistic current carrying double layers, electrons carry most of the current. The Langmuir condition states that the ratio of the electron and the ion current across the layer is given by the square root of the mass ratio of the ions to the electrons. For relativistic double layers the current ratio is 1; i.e. the current is carried equally by electrons and ions.
Energy supply: The instantaneous voltage drop across a current-carrying double layer is proportional to the total current, and is similar to that across a resistive element (or load), which dissipates energy in an electric circuit. A double layer cannot supply net energy on its own.
Stability: Double layers in laboratory plasmas may be stable or unstable depending on the parameter regime. Various types of instabilities may occur, often arising due to the formation of beams of ions and electrons. Unstable double layers are noisy in the sense that they produce oscillations across a wide frequency band. A lack of plasma stability may also lead to a sudden change in configuration often referred to as an explosion (and hence exploding double layer). In one example, the region enclosed in the double layer rapidly expands and evolves. An explosion of this type was first discovered in mercury arc rectifiers used in high-power direct-current transmission lines, where the voltage drop across the device was seen to increase by several orders of magnitude. Double layers may also drift, usually in the direction of the emitted electron beam, and in this respect are natural analogues to the smooth-bore magnetron
Magnetised plasmas: Double layers can form in both magnetised and unmagnetised and magnetized plasmas.
Cellular nature: While double layers are relatively thin, they will spread over the entire cross surface of a laboratory container. Likewise where adjacent plasma regions have different properties, double layers will form and tend to cellularise the different regions.

Energy transfer: Double layers can facilitate the transfer of electrical energy into kinetic energy, dW/dt=I•ΔV where I is the electric current dissipating energy into a double layer with a voltage drop of ΔV. Alfvén points out that the current may well consist exclusively of low-energy particles. Torvén et al. have postulated that plasma may spontaneously transfer magnetically stored energy into kinetic energy by electric double layers. No credible mechanism for producing such double layers has been presented, however. Ion thrusters can provide a more direct case of energy transfer from opposing potentials in the form of double layers produced by an external electric field.
Oblique double layer: An oblique double layer has electric fields that are not parallel to the ambient magnetic field; i.e., it is not field-aligned.
Simulation: Double layers may be modelled using kinetic computer models like particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations. In some cases the plasma is treated as essentially one- or two-dimensional to reduce the computational cost of a simulation.
Bohm Criterion: A double layer cannot exist under all circumstances. In order to produce an electric field that vanishes at the boundaries of the double layer, an existence criterion says that there is a maximum to the temperature of the ambient plasma. This is the so-called Bohm criterion.
Bio-physical analogy: A model of plasma double layers has been used to investigate their applicability to understanding ion transport across biological cell membranes. Brazilian researchers have noted that "Concepts like charge neutrality, Debye length, and double layer are very useful to explain the electrical properties of a cellular membrane." Plasma physicist Hannes Alfvén also noted that association of double layers with cellular structure, as had Irving Langmuir before him, who coined the term "plasma" after its resemblance to blood cells.