Many percussionists prefer a more dry sound with less ring. There are many different techniques that can be used to reduce ring.
One approach is to loosen the batter head a quarter to a half turn. Another way is to either increase or decrease the pitch of the bottom head so that it's different from the pitch of the top head. Either of these approaches produces a slightly more dry, funkier sound.
If unwanted ring is not eliminated—or if these types of heads produce unwanted tones—then there are multiple external muffling techniques that may be used, including:
Using a commercial muffling device, which resemble Mylar "O" rings. This is a common approach and homemade muffling rings can be made by cutting up an old drum head. Some of these come with multiple rings of different sizes; layering multiple rings on top of each other increases or decreases the muffling effect.
Placing a strip of duct tape on the batter head. Different lengths of tape, and different positions for the tape on the drum head can cause different sounds. Use of multiple strips causes a heavier muffle.
Taping a tissue or napkin to the rim of the drum, and letting it lay loose on the batter head. Again, different thicknesses and positions create different sounds.
For toms and snares, moongel can be used to reduce overtones. The bigger the piece of gel, the more the sound is muffled.
An "old school" muffling technique is to cut a long strip of felt and mount it underneath the batter head on a tom or snare, or across the front bass drum head. However, many modern drummers dismiss felt muffling as dated and feel that the felt strip interferes with the seating of the head to the drum's bearing edge, making the drum slightly more difficult to tune.
Putting a pillow inside the drum (for bass drums). The amount of muffling is controlled by how much of the pillow touches the front or rear heads; the less contact, the less muffling. Some companies produce dedicated bass drum mufflers that look like odd-shaped pillows; these work in the same fashion.
Cutting a hole in the front head, or porting it, is an option for bass drums. The hole eliminates much of the drum's natural resonance and creates a drier, punchier sound with a more defined attack. The larger the hole, the less the audible resonance.