Fig 3 shows the typical behaviour of the temperature profile through dynamic insulation where the air flows in the opposite direction to the heat flux. As the air flow increases from zero, the temperature profile becomes increasingly more curved. On the cold side of the insulation (x/L = 0) the temperature gradient becomes increasingly horizontal. As the conduction heat flow is proportional to the temperature gradient, the slope of the temperature profile on the cold side is a direct indication of the conduction heat loss through a wall or roof. On the cold side of the insulation the temperature gradient is close zero which is the basis for the claim often made that dynamic insulation can achieve a U-value of zero W/m2K.
On the warm side of the insulation the temperature gradient gets steeper with increasing air flow. This implies heat is flowing into the wall at a greater rate than for conventional insulation (air speed = 0 mm/s). For the case shown of air flowing through the insulation at 1mm/s the temperature gradient on the warm side of the insulation x/L = 1) is 621 °C/m which compares with only 100 °C/m for the conventional insulation. This implies that with an air flow of 1mm/s the inner surface is absorbing 6 times as much heat as that for conventional insulation.
A consequence of this is that considerably more heat has to be put into the wall if there is air flowing through from outside. Specifically a space heating system six time larger than that for a conventionally insulated house would be needed. It is frequently stated that in dynamic insulation the outside air is being warmed up by heat that would be lost in any case. The implication being that the outside air is being warmed by "free" heat. The fact that the heat flow into the wall increases with air speed is evidenced by the decreasing temperature of the inner surface (Table 2 and Fig 4 below). A dynamically insulated house requires also an air-to-air heat exchanger as does an airtight house. The latter has the further advantage that if it is well insulated it will require only a minimal space heating system.
The temperature gradient at point in dynamic insulation can be obtained by differentiating equation (2)

From this the temperature gradient on the cold side of the insulation (x = 0) is given by

and the temperature gradient on the warm side of the insulation (x = L) is given by

From the temperature gradient on the cold side of the insulation (equation (5)) a transmission heat loss or U-value for a dynamically insulated wall, Udyn can be calculated (Table 1)

This definition of dynamic U-value would appear to be consistent with Wallenten's definition.
The ratio of the dynamic U-value to the static U-value (u=0 m/s) is

Table 1 Dynamic U-value
With this definition, the U-value of the dynamic wall decreases exponentially with increasing air speed.
As stated above the conductive heat flow into the insulation on the warm side is very much greater than that leaving the cold side. In this case it is 6.21 X 4 / 0.0504 = 493 times for an air speed of 1 mm/s (Table 1). This imbalance in conductive heat flow is raising the temperature of the incoming air.
This large heat flow into the wall has a further consequence. At the surface of a wall, floor or ceiling there is thermal resistance which takes account of the convective and radiant heat transfer at these surfaces. For a vertical internal surface this thermal resistance has a value of 0.13 m2 K/W. In a dynamically insulated wall, as the conduction heat flow into the wall increases then so does the temperature drop across this internal thermal resistance increase. The wall surface temperature will become increasingly colder (Table 2). The temperature profiles through dynamic insulation taking into account the decrease in surface temperature with increasing air flow is shown in Fig 4.

Table 2 Temperature drop across air film thermal resistance
As the operative temperature of a room is a combination of the air temperature and the mean temperature of all the surfaces in the room this implies that people will feel increasingly cooler as the air flow through the wall increases. Occupants may be tempted to turn up the room thermostat to compensate and thereby increasing the heat loss.