In eccentric contractions, elastic tendons have the ability to operate as power attenuation. Tendons exhibit power attenuation that allows the muscle-tendon systems to absorb energy. This rate exceeds the muscle's maximum capacity for energy. In comparison, power amplification of tendons allow for greater output of power that can exceed the capacity of their respective muscle. This elastic mechanism can lead to the following reductions by lengthening muscles: peak power input, lengthening velocity, and force. Muscle damage has been correlated with these factors. However, the shuttling of energy through tendons before it is absorbed by muscles has been shown to provide a protective mechanism against that damage. However, large accumulations of elastic energy storage over time may negatively affect the timing of recoil. This results in power attenuation.
Though muscles produce and absorb mechanical power, tendons still have an integral role for dissipation of mechanical energy. This action is essential for activities like deceleration, when landing from a jump or downhill running. R.I. Griffiths conducted cross-experiments of isolated muscle-tendon preparations with in vivo studies in 1991 to keep muscles isometric during muscle-tendon unit lengthening. This was achieved with the practice of rapid stretches applied to muscle-tendon units which are then absorbed by the stretch of tendons. Experimenters explain this phenomenon by the idea that muscles are susceptible to damage when actively lengthened and this practice acts as a mechanical buffer against it. In addition, in vivo experiments it has been found that the elastic mechanism gives protection to musculoskeletal structure exceeding the sarcomere. Due to this fact, forces developed in active muscles eventually decide the forces on tendons such as bones, joints, and ligaments.
Similarly, tendons are unable to entirely insulate muscles from dynamic extension. Tendons affect muscles when muscles lengthen, which affects peak forces experienced due to energy absorbing actions in the muscle tendon unit. Active lengthening of muscle fibers results in both an accumulation and loss of energy. Even though energy is briefly stored in stretched elastic elements are also released, there is an overall net gain. This shows that muscle fibers are effective in both power production and for energy consumption utilized by the body or individual body segments with muscle-tendon units.