From previous experimental studies on large animals, it was noted that during active locomotion mammals save much of the energy they would otherwise need for running by means of elastic structures in their legs. Measurements been made of the rates of oxygen consumption of various animals, as they walked, ran or hopped, revealed that at high speeds animals seem to save more than a half the metabolic energy they would otherwise need for locomotion. A notable example is jumping in kangaroos. When hopping at slow speeds, their uses of energy increase linearly, but at high speeds, kangaroos can move as cheaply (from an energetic perspective) as if they were moving at slower speeds.
Deep research into the anatomy of large mammals such as, kangaroos and other large ungulates such as deer and gazelle, suggests strongly that some sort of elastic mechanism is important for this energetic savings. Previous combination of careful experiments, with anatomical (e.g. tendon dimensions), mechanical (e.g. force plate recordings) and mathematical calculations revealed that a significant fraction of the work done with each step could be provided by the spring-like action of tendons, rather than by muscle work. When the animal’s foot contacts the surface of the ground during high speed locomotion, the tendon or ligament is pressed tightly together, storing elastic energy much like a compressed spring. As the foot gets of the ground, the pressure on the compressed tendons and ligaments is released, and elastic recoil from these spring like structures provides additional force to propel the animal thus resulting in energetic savings. Simple calculations based kangaroo hopping and forces involved in hopping show how storage of elastic strain energy can save twenty to thirty percent of metabolic energy required for hopping. Measurements of oxygen consumption with fluctuations of kinetic and gravitational potential energy, indicate elastic savings of at least fifty four percent at high speeds.
It is important to take under consideration that metabolic benefits of elastic structures are probably most apparent for larger animals, rather than small organisms such as insects. This results from a simple fact, that larger animals can exert much higher forces on their tendons and ligaments during movement, compared to small animals.