Tendons, connective tissues, and molecular structures within a skeletal system can act as power amplifiers by storing energy gradually and releasing it rapidly. This amplification process is possible because spring-like tendons are not limited by the same rate limits imposed upon muscles by their intrinsic enzymatic processes. The process of amplification begins when a muscle contracts steadily, storing elastic strain energy in the tendon. Once the energy is completely stored, the tendon releases it in a much shorter time span than was required to create it within the muscle. The tendon is actually producing energy at a level slightly below the work done by the contracting muscle, but because power is equivalent to work over time, the considerably shorter time increases the power significantly.
This phenomenon has been observed in numerous vertebrate behaviors, one of the most notable being jumping. Observed in kangaroos, bush babies, birds, frogs, and various species of antelope, jumping relies on this system because the action is inherently limited in the time that is available to produce power once the body has begun to accelerate. Once the body loses contact with the ground there is no way for the organism to continue to produce force. Substantial improvement in acceleration resulting from these mechanisms have been observed in jumping fleas, accelerating turkeys, the striking of mantis shrimp, and the running of horses who’s bicep brachii power output is amplified fifty times by the use of catapult-like behavior of the tendon.
Feeding mechanisms also benefit from spring-like power amplifiers within the skeletal system. The depressor mandibulae of toads rely on this mechanism to produce catapult-like tongue projection. More dramatically, the ballistic tongue projection utilized by chameleons and some salamanders utilize elastic mechanisms to produce mass-specific power outputs more than five times higher than those reported for most fast muscles. In chameleons, it is significant to note that the retractor muscles utilized in prey capture decreased in power output by 600% over a 20 °C temperature range while the tongue projection mechanism, which utilizes the elastic energy storage, decreased a mere 50%, demonstrating that these elastic mechanisms do not simply amplify the power output, but they also extend the temperature range in which power outputs may be amplified.


== References ==