Large, high-current ESCs are used in electric cars, such as the Nissan Leaf, Tesla Roadster (2008), Model S, Model X, Model 3, and the Chevrolet Bolt. The energy draw is usually measured in kilowatts (the Nissan Leaf, for instance, uses an 80 kilowatt motor that produces 210 foot-pounds of torque). Most mass-produced electric cars use AC motors, which allow the ESC to capture energy when the car coasts, using the motor as a generator and slowing the car down. The captured energy is used to charge the batteries and thus extend the driving range of the car (this is known as regenerative braking). In some vehicles, such as those produced by Tesla, this can be used to slow down so effectively that the car's conventional brakes are only needed at very low speeds (the motor braking effect diminishes as the speed is reduced). In others, such as the Nissan Leaf, there is only a slight "drag" effect when coasting, and the ESC modulates the energy capture in tandem with the conventional brakes to bring the car to a stop.

Some custom-built electric cars (usually built by enthusiasts using the chassis, body and transmission of an existing vehicle) use DC motors instead of AC, because of their lower cost and simpler wiring. However, DC motors cannot be used for regenerative braking, so these vehicles cannot travel as far on the same battery, all other factors being equal. DC motors also cannot safely run at RPMs as high as AC motors can, so many custom-built electric cars retain a multi-speed transmission of some kind. Since electric motors have full torque from zero RPM, the vehicle can still start off in a high gear, but starting in a lower gear allows for quicker acceleration, lower current draw and less wear and tear on the motor. This is a limited view of the system; in fact the current and the proportional torque is limited by the batteries and / or the power devices used to control the motor so that a transmission could be beneficial to increase torque at low vehicle speeds just like a gasoline fueled one. However it is usually easier to increase the motor size so that the maximum torque is acceptable since the weight of a transmission can be equal to the motor.
ESCs used in mass-produced electric cars with AC motors usually have reversing capability, allowing the motor to run in both directions. The car has only one gear ratio, and the motor simply runs in the opposite direction to make the car go in reverse. Some custom-built electric cars with DC motors also have this feature, using an electrical switch to reverse the direction of the motor, but others run the motor in the same direction all the time and use a traditional manual or automatic transmission to reverse direction (usually this is easier, since the vehicle used for the conversion already has the transmission, and the electric motor is simply installed in place of the original engine).