The hardware of ECVT systems consists of sensing electrode plates, the data acquisition circuitry, and the computer to control the overall system and process the data. ECVT is a non-intrusive and non-invasive imaging modality due to its contactless operation. Prior to the actual measurements, a calibration and normalization procedure is necessary to cancel out the effects of stray capacitance and any insulating wall between the electrodes and the region of interest to be imaged. After calibration and normalization, the measurements can be divided into a sequence of acquisitions where two separate electrodes are involved: one electrode (TX) is excited with AC voltage source in the quasi-electrostatic regime, typically below 10 MHz, while a second electrode (RX) is placed at the ground potential used for measuring the resultant current. The remaining electrodes are also placed at ground potential.
This process is repeated for all possible electrode pairs. Note that reversing the roles of TX and RX electrodes would result in the same mutual capacitance due to the reciprocity. As a result, for ECVT systems with N number of plates, the number of independent measurement is equal to N(N-1)/2. This process is typically automated through data acquisition circuitry. Depending on the operation frequency, number of plates and frame rate per second of the measurement system, one full measurement cycle can vary; however, this is in the order of few seconds or less. One of the most critical parts of ECVT systems is sensor design. As the previous discussion suggests, increasing the number of electrodes also increases the amount of independent information about the region of interests. However this results in smaller electrode sizes which in turn results in low signal to noise ratio . Increasing the electrode size, on the other hand, does not result in non-uniform charge distribution over the plates, which may exacerbate the ill-posedness of the problem. The sensor dimension is also limited by the gaps between the sensing electrodes. These are important due to fringe effects. The use of guard plates between electrodes have been shown to reduce these effects. Based on the intended application, ECVT sensors can be composed of single or more layers along the axial direction. The volume tomography with ECVT is not obtained from merging of 2D scans but rather from 3D discretized voxels sensitivities.
The design of the electrodes is also dictated by the shape of the domain under investigation. Some domains can be relatively simple geometries (cylindrical, rectangular prism, etc.) where symmetrical electrode placement can be used. However, complex geometries (corner joints, T-shaped domains, etc.) require specially designed electrodes to properly surround the domain. The flexibility of ECVT makes it very useful for field applications where the sensing plates cannot be placed symmetrically. It should also be noted that since the Laplace equation lacks a characteristic length (such as the wavelength in Helmholtz equation), the fundamental physics of the ECVT problem is scalable in size as long as quasi-static regime properties are preserved.