Historically, two conventions for sign for the electrode potential have formed:
convention "Nernst–Lewis–Latimer" (sometimes referred to as "American"),
convention "Gibbs–Ostwald–Stockholm" (sometimes referred to as "European").
In 1953 in Stockholm IUPAC recognized that either of the conventions is permissible; however, it unanimously recommended that only the magnitude expressed according to the convention (2) be called "the electrode potential". To avoid possible ambiguities, the electrode potential thus defined can also be referred to as Gibbs–Stockholm electrode potential.
In both conventions, the EMF of the half-cell is referred to the standard hydrogen electrode as the zero point.
According to the Nernst–Lewis–Latimer convention (1), the sign of the potential is determined by the change of the sign of the standard Gibbs free energy of the half-cell reaction. This reaction transfers nF of the positive electric charge across the phase boundary from the left to the right of the half-cell, as shown in the half-cell diagram. The relation is written as




Δ
G
=
−
n
F
E
,


{\displaystyle \Delta G=-nFE,}

where:
ΔG is the standard Gibbs energy for the half-cell reaction,
n is number of electrons transferred across the phase boundary in the above reaction,
F is the Faraday constant,
E is the half-cell potential according to the Nernst–Lewis–Latimer convention.
Therefore, according to the convention (1), the value of EMF is bivariant (with two variants), i.e., reversing the electrode reaction and reversing the corresponding cell diagram will cause the change of sign of ΔG and E, even though the polarity of the cell measured with a direct-current voltmeter does not necessarily reverse. This convention has been historically (sometimes still is) used to express anodic oxidation potentials or cathodic reduction potentials of half-cells. The reduction potentials expressed according to (1) have the same sign as those expressed according to the convention (2).
According to the Gibbs–Stockholm convention (2), the sign of the electrode potential is determined by the polarity of the cell terminal measured against the standard hydrogen electrode using an instrument for DC potential measurements, when this circuit is closed and balanced (i.e., the current on the measurement circuit is nil). In convention (2), the value of the measured EMF is invariant of the direction of the infinitesimally small changes of the electric current that may be allowed on the measured electrode and render it either cathodic or anodic. Therefore, the value of E does not change with the direction of the (very small) current, even though ΔG of the corresponding reaction is bivariant (can have either positive or negative).