Ionization is only the first step in electrostatic fluid acceleration. Once the ions are created they have to be used to generate a thrust. This process relies on the same electrodes and electric field as the corona process.
The ions that have been created have a net charge. Because of this charge they will be repelled from the electrode having the same charge and simultaneously attracted to the other electrode with the opposite charge. However, in between these electrodes are enormous numbers of neutral air molecules that have been unaffected by the ionization process. To reach the attracting electrode the ions must literally push their way through the mass of neutral molecules. In doing so, they tend to push those neutrals along with them; this is the process which results in a thrust.
It is important to note that because the ions are continuously propelled by the electric field they can continue to bump into and accelerate neutral ions the entire distance between the electrodes. This is possible because they are given potential energy by the electric field. The electric potential energy of the ions is converted to kinetic energy of the neutrals in each collision. This is the mechanism whereby electrical energy is used to do work by accelerating the neutral air. Some energy is also wasted of course, by slightly raising the temperature of the air and the electrodes, and increasing motion of the molecules in unwanted directions.
Once the ions reach the attracting electrode most of them will lose their charge, i.e., by gaining an electron from the electrode. The fraction of the ions that do not collide with the attracting electrode will tend to be drawn back (up stream) to the attracting electrode. This causes the EFA device to be, more or less, being "driven with a foot on the gas and a foot on the brake." An alternating driving voltage of the right frequency can, in principle, minimize this effect. The neutralized molecules may bounce off the attracting electrode in any random direction. The neutral molecules are not influenced by either electrode and thus their net flow is unaffected as they exit the EFA device.
Physicists and engineers have developed models for some aspects of corona ionization and fluid acceleration; but in general, due to its complexity there is no general-purpose model which can predict exactly what will happen under any given set of circumstances. For example, air temperature, humidity, electrode shape, and airflow all can affect the exact amount of energy required, the number of ions generated, etc. Because of these difficulties, developments in EFA have relied on experimentation more than modeling to fine-tune and refine ionization designs.