The overall goal of event tree analysis is to determine the probability of possible negative outcomes that can cause harm and result from the chosen initiating event. It is necessary to use detailed information about a system to understand intermediate events, accident scenarios, and initiating events to construct the event tree diagram. The event tree begins with the initiating event where consequences of this event follow in a binary (success/failure) manner. Each event creates a path in which a series of successes or failures will occur where the overall probability of occurrence for that path can be calculated. The probabilities of failures for intermediate events can be calculated using fault tree analysis and the probability of success can be calculated from 1 = probability of success(ps) + probability of failure (pf). For example, in the equation 1 = (ps) + (pf) if we know that pf=.1 from fault tree analysis then through simple algebra we can solve for ps where ps = (1) - (pf) then we would have ps = (1) - (.1) and ps=.9.
The event tree diagram models all possible pathways from the initiating event. The initiating event starts at the left side as a horizontal line that branches vertically. the vertical branch is representative of the success/failure of the initiating event. At the end of the vertical branch a horizontal line is drawn on each the top and the bottom representing the success or failure of the first event where a description (usually success or failure) is written with a tag that represents the path such as 1s where s is a success and 1 is the event number similarly with 1f where 1 is the event number and f denotes a failure (see attached diagram). This process continues until the end state is reached. When the event tree diagram has reached the end state for all pathways the outcome probability equation is written.
Steps to perform an event tree analysis:
Define the system: Define what needs to be involved or where to draw the boundaries.
Identify the accident scenarios: Perform a system assessment to find hazards or accident scenarios within the system design.
Identify the initiating events: Use a hazard analysis to define initiating events.
Identify intermediate events: Identify countermeasures associated with the specific scenario.
Build the event tree diagram
Obtain event failure probabilities: If the failure probability can not be obtained use fault tree analysis to calculate it.
Identify the outcome risk: Calculate the overall probability of the event paths and determine the risk.
Evaluate the outcome risk: Evaluate the risk of each path and determine its acceptability.
Recommend corrective action: If the outcome risk of a path is not acceptable develop design changes that change the risk.
Document the ETA: Document the entire process on the event tree diagrams and update for new information as needed.