Molecular dynamics developed in the late 1950s by Alder et al. and early 1960s by Rahman may be regarded as a first step toward the extended discrete element method, although the forces due to collisions between particles were replaced by energy potentials e.g. Lennard-Jones potentials of molecules and atoms as long range forces to determine interaction.
Similarly, the fluid dynamic interaction of particles suspended in a flow were investigated. The drag forces exerted on the particles by the relative velocity by them and the flow were treated as additional forces acting on the particles. Therefore, these multiphase flow phenomena including a solid e.g.~particulate and a gaseous or fluid phase resolve the particulate phase by discrete methods, while gas or liquid flow is described by continuous methods, and therefore, is labelled the combined continuum and discrete model (CCDM) as applied by Kawaguchi et al., Hoomans, Xu 1997 and Xu 1998. Due to a discrete description of the solid phase, constitutive relations are omitted, and therefore, leads to a better understanding of the fundamentals. This was also concluded by Zhu 2007 et al. and Zhu 2008 et al. during a review on particulate flows modelled with the CCDM approach. It has seen a mayor development in last two decades and describes motion of the solid phase by the Discrete Element Method (DEM) on an individual particle scale and the remaining phases are treated by the Navier-Stokes equations. Thus, the method is recognized as an effective tool to investigate into the interaction between a particulate and fluid phase as reviewed by Yu and Xu, Feng and Yu  and Deen et al. Based on the CCDM methodology the characteristics of spouted and fluidised beds are predicted by Gryczka et al.
The theoretical foundation for the XDEM was developed in 1999 by Peters, who described incineration of a wooden moving bed on a forward acting grate. The concept was later also employed by Sismsek et al. to predict the furnace process of a grate firing system. Applications to the complex processes of a blast furnace have been attempted by Shungo et al. Numerical simulation of fluid injection into a gaseous environment nowadays is adopted by a large number of CFD-codes codes such as Star-CD of CD-adapco, Ansys and AVL-Fire. Droplets of a spray are treated by a zero-dimensional approach to account for heat and mass transfer to the fluid phase.