If successfully detected, the gravitational wave signal from an EMRI will carry a wealth of astrophysical data. EMRIs evolve slowly and complete many (~10,000) cycles before eventually plunging. Therefore, the gravitational wave signal encodes a precise map of the spacetime geometry of the supermassive black hole. Consequently, the signal can be used as an accurate test of the predictions of general relativity in the regime of strong gravity; a regime in which general relativity is completely untested. In particular, it is possible to test the hypothesis that the central object is indeed a supermassive black hole to high accuracy by measuring the quadrupole moment of the gravitational field to an accuracy of a fraction of a percent.
In addition, each observation of an EMRI system will allow an accurate determination of the parameters of the system, including:
The mass and angular momentum of the central object to an accuracy of 1 in 10,000. By gathering the statistics of the mass and angular momentum of a large number of supermassive black holes, it should be possible to answer questions about their formation. If the angular momentum of the supermassive black holes is large, then they probably acquired most of their mass by swallowing gas from their accretion disc. Moderate values of the angular momentum indicate that the object is most likely formed from the merger of several smaller objects with a similar mass, while low values indicate that the mass has grown by swallowing smaller objects coming in from random directions.
The mass of the orbiting object to an accuracy of 1 in 10,000. The population of these masses could yield interesting insights in the population of compact objects in the nuclei of galaxies.
The eccentricity (1 in 10,000) and the (cosine of the) inclination (1 in 100-1000) of the orbit. The statistics for the values concerning the shape and orientation of the orbit contains information about the formation history of these objects. (See the Formation section below.)
The luminosity distance (5 in 100) and position (with a accuracy of 10−3 steradian) of the system. Because the shape of the signal encodes the other parameters of the system, we know how strong the signal was when it was emitted. Consequently, one can infer the distance of the system from the observed strength of the signal (since it diminishes with the distance travelled). Unlike other means of determining distances of the order of several billion light-years, the determination is completely self-contained and does not rely on the cosmic distance ladder. If the system can be matched with an optical counterpart, then this provides a completely independent way of determining the Hubble parameter at cosmic distances.
Testing the validity of the Kerr conjecture. This hypothesis states that all black holes are rotating black holes of the Kerr or Kerr–Newman types.