It is currently thought that the centers of most (large) galaxies consist of a supermassive black hole of 106 to 109 solar masses (M☉) surrounded by a cluster of 107 to 108 stars maybe 10 light-years across, called the nucleus. The orbits of the objects around the central supermassive black hole are continually perturbed by two-body interactions with other objects in the nucleus, changing the shape of the orbit. Occasionally, an object may pass close enough to the central supermassive black hole for its orbit to produce large amounts of gravitational waves, significantly affecting the orbit. Under specific conditions such an orbit may become an EMRI.
In order to become an EMRI, the back-reaction from the emission of gravitational waves must be the dominant correction to the orbit (compared to, for example, two-body interactions). This requires that the orbiting objects passes very close the central supermassive black hole. A consequence of this is that the inspiralling object cannot be a large heavy star, because it will be ripped apart by the tidal forces.
However, if the object passes too close to the central supermassive black hole, it will make a direct plunge across the event horizon. This will produce a brief violent burst of gravitational radiation which would be hard to detect with currently planned observatories. Consequently, the creation of EMRI requires a fine balance between objects passing too close and too far from the central supermassive black hole. Currently, the best estimates are that a typical supermassive black hole of 106 M☉, will capture an EMRI once every 106 to 108 years. This makes witnessing such an event in our Milky Way unlikely. However, a space based gravitational wave observatory like LISA will be able to detect EMRI events up to cosmological distances, leading to an expected detection rate somewhere between a few and a few thousand per year.
Extreme mass ratio inspirals created in this way tend to have very large eccentricities (e > 0.9999). The initial, high eccentricity orbits may also be a source of gravitational waves, emitting a short burst as the compact object passes through periapsis. These gravitational wave signals are known as extreme mass ratio bursts. As the orbit shrinks due the emission of gravitational waves, it becomes more circular. When it has shrunk enough for the gravitational waves to become strong and frequent enough to be continuously detectable by LISA, the eccentricity will typically be around 0.7. Since the distribution of objects in the nucleus is expected to be approximately spherically symmetric, there is expected to be no correlation between the initial plane of the inspiral and the spin of the central supermassive black holes.
In 2011, an important impediment to the formation of EMRIs was discovered. The "Schwarzschild Barrier" is an upper limit to the eccentricity of orbits near a supermassive black hole. Gravitational scattering is driven by torques from the slightly asymmetric distribution of mass in the nucleus ("resonant relaxation"), resulting in a random walk in each star's eccentricity. When its eccentricity becomes sufficiently large, the orbit begins to undergo relativistic precession, and the effectiveness of the torques is quenched. There is a critical eccentricity, at each value of the semi-major axis, at which stars are "reflected" back to lower eccentricities. Barrier penetration can occur, but the rate of production of EMRIs is much lower than would be expected in the absence of the barrier. Estimates of the EMRI rate made prior to 2011 ignored this effect.
Two years later, however, it was realised that the role of the spin of the central supermassive black hole in this matter may be crucial. For a long time it has been believed that any EMRI originating farther away than a certain critical radius of about a hundredth of a parsec would be either scattered away from the capture orbit or directly plunge into the supermassive black hole on an extremely radial orbit. These events would lead to one or a few bursts, but not to a coherent set of thousands of them. Indeed, when taking into account the spin,  proved that these capture orbits do not plunge, but accumulate thousands of cycles in the detector band. Since they are driven by two-body relaxation, which is chaotic in nature, they are ignorant of the Schwarzchild barrier and are not blocked. Moreover, since they originate in the bulk of the stellar distribution, the rates are larger. Additionally, due to their larger eccentricity, they are louder, which enhances the detection volume. It is therefore expected that EMRIs originate at these distances, and that they dominate the rates, contrary to EMRIs originating from within a hundredth of a parsec, which are blocked.