Several alternative processes for the production of extreme mass ratio inspirals are known. One possibility would be for the central supermassive black hole to capture a passing object that is not bound to it. However, the window where the object passes close enough to the central black hole to be captured, but far enough to avoid plunging directly into it is extremely small, making it unlikely that such event contribute significantly to the expected event rate.
Another possibility is present if the compact object occurs in a bound binary system with another object. If such a system passes close enough to the central supermassive black hole it is separated by the tidal forces, ejecting one of the objects from the nucleus at a high velocity while the other is captured by the central black hole with a relatively high probability of becoming an EMRI. If more than 1% of the compact objects in the nucleus is found in binaries this process may compete with the "standard" picture described above. EMRIs produced by this process typically have a low eccentricity, becoming very nearly circular by the time they are detectable by LISA.
A third option is that a giant star passes close enough to the central massive black hole for the outer layers to be stripped away by tidal forces, after which the remaining core may become an EMRI. However, it is uncertain if the coupling between the core and outer layers of giant stars is strong enough for stripping to have a significant enough effect on the orbit of the core.
Finally, supermassive black holes are often accompanied by an accretion disc of matter spiraling towards the black hole. If this disc contains enough matter, instabilities can collapse to form new stars. If massive enough, these can collapse to form compact objects, which are automatically on a trajectory to become an EMRI. Extreme mass ratio inspirals created in this way are characterized by the fact their orbital plane is strongly correlated with the plane of the accretion disc and the spin of the supermassive black hole.