Consider the special case where the cylindrical conducting disk is stationary but the cylindrical magnetic disk is rotating. In such a situation, the mean velocity v of charges in the conducting disk is initially zero, and therefore the magnetic force F = qv × B is 0, where v is the mean velocity of a charge q of the circuit relative to the frame where measurements are taken, and q is the charge on an electron.
Note that v does not represent the velocity that magnetic fields lines travel through the conductor. The magnetic field pattern observed depends on the frame of reference. They have no velocity on their own. To illustrate, imagine that one were to take a magnet and flip it 180 degrees. The result of assuming that these field lines actually have velocity of their own would be that magnetic field lines far away would swing to the other side, potentially faster than the speed of light, however, that is not what happens.
Instead, what happens is that rotating a magnet causes subatomic particles in the magnet to acquire a change in velocity. However, in the rotated magnet, the velocities of electrons would vary ahead or behind those of the other particles, due to their lower mass compared to nuclei. There is length contraction of fields propagating from moving charges, and the length contraction of the electric fields E of the electrons would be greater or lesser than the contraction of the E fields of the positive nuclei depending on whether the rotation of the magnet was aligned to, or opposed to, the electron spins which give rise to the magnetism.
In the case of an axially-symmetric magnet spinning at constant velocity, the distribution of the magnetic field intensity B of the magnet is constant with time, even after accounting for the relativistic corrections to B, and therefore by the Maxwell–Faraday equation the electric field induced by the rotation of the magnet is curl-free, which is caused purely by length contraction of the electric fields of its constituting subatomic particles. This means that in this particular example with a rotating magnetic disk and a stationary conducting disk, the induced electric field cannot be described by the Maxwell–Faraday equation, which describes the curl of the electric field induced by a changing magnetic flux density.
Therefore, in this view, magnetic fields do not rotate with their magnetic source, and they exist independently of them. Nevertheless, the Lorentz forces generated by the rotation of the magnet are as if these lines rotated in unison with it, but this is in reality due to the effect of relativity on electric fields.