This concept is based on the general relativity theory and the quantum field theory from which the idea that space has a physical structure can be proposed. The macroscopic structure is described by the general relativity theory and the microscopic structure by the quantum field theory. The idea is to deform space around the space craft. By deforming the space it would be possible to create a region with higher pressure behind the space craft than before it. Due to the pressure gradient a force would be exerted on the space craft which in turn creates thrust for propulsion. Due to the purely theoretical nature of this propulsion concept it is hard to determine the amount of thrust and the maximum velocity that could be achieved. Currently there are two different concepts for such a field propulsion system one that is purely based on the general relativity theory and one based on the quantum field theory.
In the general relativistic field propulsion system space is considered to be an elastic field similar to rubber which means that space itself can be treated as an infinite elastic body. If the space-time curves, a normal inwards surface stress is generated which serves as a pressure field. By creating a great number of those curve surfaces behind the space craft it is possible to achieve a unidirectional surface force which can be use for the acceleration of the space craft.
For the quantum field theoretical propulsion system it is assumed, as stated by the quantum field theory and quantum Electrodynamics, that the quantum vacuum consists out of a zero-radiating electromagnetic field in a non-radiating mode and at a zero-point energy state, the lowest possible energy state. It is also theorized that matter is composed out of elementary primary charged entities, partons, which are bound together as elementary oscillators. By applying an electromagnetic zero point field a Lorentz force is applied on the partons. Using this on a dielectric material could effect the inertia of the mass and that way create an acceleration of the material without creating stress or strain inside the material.