Firestorm has the ability to rearrange Molecular or Particle structure of any substance into most anything else, changing the subatomic particles of matter & energy to create objects comprising different atomic characteristics of equal mass. He can not only transmute the basic composition of an object (e.g., transmuting lead into gold pertaining to equivalent substance) but he can also change its shape or form at will. Much like a Green Lantern's limitations, Firestorm can only create items whose workings are understood by the "driver" of the Firestorm matrix, through it he can make more complex sentient constructs out of the Matrix's energies. Unlike a Green Lantern's creations, Firestorm's alterations are permanent unless he reverses them. Initially he could not, however, affect organic matter without painful, even lethal, feedback; e.i. fatal biophysical disruption or even localized particle motion phenomena like extreme changes in the weather. It was later revealed that Firestorm could always change organic matter but opted not to, As Jason Rusch became Firestorm, however, this weakness appeared to have dissipated.
With old and new variations the organic limitation does not extend to his own person, as its users can ato-molecularly change their driver self at will, allowing them to regenerate lost and/or damaged bodily tissue, boost immune systems, shapeshift, increase physical capabilities and survive indefinitely without food, sleep, water and air. Capacities of which stemming to superhuman levels of strength, durability, stamina and resistance to injury great enough to challenge New Gods in a fight and win. Such as the likes of Orion, Lashina, even an empowered Kalibak or surviving the rigors of outer space and sitting near the inner corona above the sun's photosphere without a hint of discomfort. Firestorm's power has been stated by Prof. Stein to be theoretically infinite, harnessing the spark of creation; The Big Bang itself as a testament to its true capacity. But infinite power runs the risk of burning out its host in a heartbeat.
Meaning while it can be utilized by a singular host driver, as was the case with Ronnie, Stein and Rusch. It's explained why it is best The Matrix requires two people in order to pilot it. Because otherwise both its pilot and they're secondary will literally wink out of existence over time, through his mastery and understanding of Firestorm. Martin instructed Rusch on how to study current and potential powers available to them within the Matrix, as well as manually adjust them on the fly at a later date; Its main source of energy stemmed from the ambient stellar energies of native stars and suns but could also use its co-pilot within the matrix as a power source to keep it going, unfortunately this causes them to burn out over time. Causing them to genetically disintegrate if they're not properly adjusted to its power. The merging aspect of it can also enable outside fusions with the addition of assimilating any inherent abilities these others might possess, e.i. Gehenna for instance, while part of the Firestorm Matrix, this can diminish its effectiveness and stability however. Rusch has shown he can spontaneously warp himself and/or others he's previously merged with to his specific location triggering the change, neural pathway connection allows the gestalt to access each others knowledge and memories to better utilize firestorm's capabilities, the power to fly at fantastic (but unmeasured) speeds. So far easily able to travel from sub-sonic to supersonic speeds in a planetary atmosphere and even reaching escape velocities when breaching or outside of world orbit, even controlling quantum states to some degree. Able to adjust the driver body's size or pulling and enlarging others of small stature from the subatomic universe at will, Rusch having dragged Ray Palmer from his microscopic size to the natural world while on Apokolips.
The rendering of self intangible and thereby passing through solid objects harmlessly. Creativity in using it allowed Rusch to communicate with John Stewart and sift through his mind telepathically after he'd been taken over by the void beast, Firestorm's also highly adept at absorbing and redistributing radiation or energy both harmlessly and productively. Such as in Green Lantern: Circle of Fire issue #7 having both absorbed Zeta Radiation from Adam Strange's body and repurpose it to turn a universe destroying quasar back onto itself and absorbing fallout from a massive nuclear detonation with ease. To generating destructive or concussive blasts of fission/fusion energy from his hands, eyes, mouth, etc; through which he can also channel his transmogrification powers. Users of the Firestorm Matrix also have the ability to purview a type of ancestral memory of the Matrix's existence and the past of former users, allowing them to access the latent knowledge of the atoms comprising it. Able to see and experience whatever they've been through throughout the eons. This also translates into a form of time-space sight in which the matrix user can glimpse the past, present, future and alternate lives of every other firestorm throughout reality using a collective of subatomic wormholes which exist as apart of the Matrix. But this power is largely too complex to properly control, thus it is highly unreliable as an ability so far.
An unrepresented effect of the Firestorm Matrix is that while it grants the fusers unique powers, it can also accidentally bestow them on individuals caught in the Matrix by mistake. Such as Nanette Phaedon, wife of the late Allen Phaedon, who gained the ability to change her quantum state for size shifting and flight by her own will. Following Raymond's resurrection during Brightest Day, Firestorm gained the ability to switch "drivers" between Ronnie and Jason at will; before that only the active driver was in control, with the dormant consciousness only able to advise the other on what action to take rather than do anything themselves. One of the faults of a Firestorm fusion lies in that the stronger psyche will have better control over the Matrix's power, such was the case with Jason fusing with Luis Salvador who managed to overpower him while in the passenger seat of the Matrix. during the New 52 the powers of the Firestorm matrix remain the same but now not only can it be shared through multiple users at a time, but through the processes of nuclear fusion with another matrix wielder they can fuse into larger and stronger yet more unstable atomic entities with greatly amplified powers as opposed to the sum total of its individual parts. The entity formed between Ronnie and Jason when using the Matrix in tandem create a nuclear being called The Fury when they pool their resources. It's also shown that The Matrix shares kinship to the Quantum Field in some way, enabling Firestorm users to derive its power for subatomic transmutation and manipulation. some believe it is key to the fabled God Particle theory that physicists and philosophers have sought after for centuries. Its merging properties also has the hidden danger of over taxation, if more than two people are joined to the Matrix at one time. Firestorm runs the risk of reaching critical mass and detonating with enough force to wipe out the eastern seaboard, at best. At worst too many fusee's in the Matrix could trigger a second Big Bang that'll wipe out the entire universe.