As an archetype, it helps to gain insight into patterns that are present in the system and thereby also give the tools to change these patterns. In the case of "Fixes that fail", the warning sign is a problem which reappears although fixes were applied. It is crucial to recognize that the fix only adds to the overall deteriorating state and does not solve the problem. To identify this pattern, it is needed to consider a connection between the symptoms and the fixes we apply to solve them, which can be very difficult to do. In management this can be present as a "hero-scapegoat" cycle. While the manager who applied the fix gets promoted for diminishing the problem. A new manager must face the returning problem symptom and may be punished for failing to do his job. Then a new hero is found who temporarily solves the problem symptoms. The delay of the reinforcing loop makes it difficult to recognize the causal relation between the fix applied to the symptoms and the new problems arising. What then seems to be a series of successes in short-term then are steps towards failure on the long-term.
Some typical ways of thinking associated with the pattern are:
"It always seemed to work before; why isn't it working now?"
"This is a simple problem and the solution is straightforward."
"We need to fix this problem now. We can deal with any consequences later."
They can serve as a warning that this archetype is present or will be.
If this pattern is recognized, then there are multiple possibilities how to react, depending on which leverage point is addressed:
Focus on the long-term and if a fix is inevitably needed, use it only to buy time to work on the long-term remedy.
Raise awareness of the unintended consequences of the fixes.
Focus on the underlying problem and not the symptoms.
Find either a fix without consequences or with limited long-term impact.
Find a way to measure the intended and also unintended consequences of the solutions by learning also from the past fixes.
Change the performance review time so that the long-term progress becomes visible.