Most FluxNet sites have at minimum sensors to accurately measure the wind speed as well as the concentration of the trace gases in question. To obtain the necessary data, it is common for the towers to employ a sonic anemometer, an infrared gas analyzer and some sensor to measure humidity. These tools are necessary because they provide the necessary variables to be put into the eddy covariance model of gas flux in the biosphere.

The principle behind the eddy covariance technique is that parcels of air have eddy like characteristics in the atmosphere. In other words, when trace gases are respired by vegetation, their velocity can be represented by a 3D vector. The purpose of using such a precise anemometer is to measure value of the wind velocity component in three dimensions. Using the infrared gas analyzer and the humidity sensor, the concentration of water vapor and trace gases in the air sample is measured and sent to a computer which quickly figures out the mass flux of the gas in question. This mass flux makes the FluxNet project a valuable tool to scientists trying to monitor long term changes in trace gas flux within the atmosphere.

Many different forms of anemometer exist on the current market. Unfortunately, the majority of the anemometers can only measure wind velocity in one plane and require a certain start-up wind speed. Sonic anemometers are solid state devices that measure the wind speed by passing ultrasonic sound waves through the moving air. As wind speed changes, so does the air density and when the density changes, so does the speed of sound. By measuring the change in time it takes for the ultrasonic sound wave to make its way from the emitter to the sensor, the sonic anemometer can measure the total air speed as well as its direction.

This sensor works because Infrared light is absorbed by a variety of gases at different wavelengths within the spectrum including methane, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and oxygen. To measure the concentration, a beam of light is emitted into the air sample. By measuring the difference between the input and output of the infrared beam, the sensor can determine the amount of the trace gases in the sample. It is common for an infrared gas analyzer to have two configurations. The "open design" operates by shooting a beam of infrared light through the air outside of the sensor body. Meanwhile, the closed design works by sucking air into the sensor body measuring the concentration of trace gases inside of a sealed chamber. Usually, open sensors are placed within half a meter of the anemometer while closed sensors use a collection tube mounted inside the anemometer to get their air sample.

The hygrogemeter is an essential tool used to figure out the concentration of water vapor in the air. Unfortunately, water vapor absorbs several frequencies of light in the infrared range and most of these bands overlap that of the trace gases. Without accounting for water vapor, the Infrared gas analyzer would give false data. To solve this problem, an accurate water vapor measurement is needed. Solid state hygrometers are designed to have two metal plates separated by a small air gap. Differing levels of humidity in the air change the capacitance of the air gap. This can be measured by applying a high frequency AC voltage to the plates and measuring the capacitance through an RC circuit.