Electron irradiation uses a stream of electrons accelerated by an electric voltage or radio frequency wave to a velocity close to the speed of light. Electrons have mass and negative electric charge, and therefore electron beams at the energies allowed for food irradiation do not penetrate into the product beyond several centimeters, depending on product density. Therefore, electron beams are preferred for thin products
Gamma irradiation involves packets of light (photons) that originate from radioactive decay of atomic nuclei. Gamma rays are used for products that are too thick for treatment with electron beams. Every radioactive element gives rise to Gamma rays with specific energies characteristic of the source element, these rays have zero mass and no electrical charge. The ones used for food irradiation are able to penetrate through food products. The radioactive isotope radioisotope cobalt-60 is used as the source in all commercial scale gamma irradiation facilities. Gamma irradiation is most widely used technology because the deeper penetration of the gamma rays enables administering treatment to entire industrial pallets or totes (reducing the need for material handling) and it is significantly less expensive than using an X-ray source. Cobalt-60 is bred from cobalt-59 using neutron irradiation in specifically designed nuclear reactors. In limited applications caesium-137, a less costly alternative recovered during the processing of spent nuclear fuel, is used as a radioactive source. Insufficient quantities are available for large scale commercial use. An incident where water-soluble caesium-137 leaked into the source storage pool requiring NRC intervention has led to near elimination of this radioisotope.
Irradiation by X-ray is similar to irradiation by gamma rays but the rays produced have a distribution of energetic packets of light, still the maximum energy of the produced X-ray photon is limited by the energy put into the X-ray generator therefore it is possible to guarantee that no partials capable of inducing irradiation can be emitted. X-rays are generated by colliding accelerated electrons with a dense target material (this process is known as bremsstrahlung-conversion), and the X-rays so produced have a spectrum characteristic of the dense target material. Heavy metals, such as tantalum and tungsten, are used because of their high atomic numbers and high melting temperatures. Tantalum is usually preferred versus tungsten for industrial, large-area, high-power targets because it is more workable than tungsten and has a higher threshold energy for induced reactions. Like electron beams, X-rays do not necessitate the use of radioactive materials and can be switched off when not needed. X-rays ability to penetrate the target is similar to gamma irradiation. X-ray machines produce better dose uniformity than Gamma rays, and their penetration depth is similar to slightly greater than that of gamma rays, but they require much more electricity as only as much as 12% of the input energy is converted into X-rays.