The concept of a force field goes back at least as far as the 1920s, in the works of E.E. 'Doc' Smith and others; in William Hope Hodgson's The Night Land (1912) the Last Redoubt, the remnants of an humanity shelter is generated by something very like a force field.
In Isaac Asimov's Foundation universe, personal shields have been developed by scientists specializing in the miniaturization of planet-based shields. As they are primarily used by Foundation Traders, most other inhabitants of the Galactic Empire do not know about this technology. In an unrelated short story Breeds There a Man...? by Asimov, scientists are working on a force field ("energy so channelled as to create a wall of matter-less inertia"), capable of protecting the population in case of a nuclear war. The force field demonstrated in the end is a solid hemisphere, apparently completely opaque and reflective from both sides.
The concept of force fields as a defensive measure from enemy attack or as a form of attack can be regularly found in modern video games as well as in movies, such as in The War of the Worlds (1953, George Pál) and Independence Day.
In the episode "The Four Musketurtles" of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 1987 TV series, Krang uses his technology by using an "Impervium" stone hooked up to a generator that allows its user to create a forcefield that prevents the user from getting harmed by any weapon whilst activated.
The ability to create a force field has been a common superpower in comic books and associated media. While only a few characters have the explicit ability to create force fields (for example, the Invisible Woman of the Fantastic Four and Violet Parr from The Incredibles), it has been emulated via other powers, such as Green Lantern's energy constructs, Jean Grey's telekinesis, and Magneto's manipulation of electromagnetic fields. Apart from this, its importance is also highlighted in Dr. Michio Kaku's books (such as Physics of the Impossible). In Star Wars-related movie Caravan of Courage, character Mace Towani is trapped under the surface of lake by spell-liked force field. His companion members rescued him by a magic wand, which were able to penetrate the force field.
In the 2017 series, The Gifted, Lauren Strucker possesses the power to create force fields by condensing air molecules.