Reactive forces on sailing craft include forward resistance—sailboat's hydrodynamic resistance (Rl), an ice boat's sliding resistance or a land sailing craft's rolling resistance in the direction of travel—which are to be minimized in order to increase speed, and lateral force, perpendicular to the direction of travel, which is to be made sufficiently strong to minimize sideways motion and to guide the craft on course.
Forward resistance comprises the types of drag that impede a sailboat's speed through water (or an ice boat's speed over the surface) include components of parasitic drag, consisting primarily of form drag, which arises because of the shape of the hull. and skin friction, which arises from the friction of the water (for boats) or air (for ice boats and land sailing craft) against the "skin" of the hull that is moving through it. Displacement vessels are also subject to wave resistance from the energy that goes into displacing water into waves and that is limited by hull speed, which is a function of waterline length, Wheeled vehicles' forward speed is subject to rolling friction and ice boats are subject to kinetic or sliding friction. Parasitic drag in water or air increases with the square of speed (VB2 or VA2, respectively);  rolling friction increases linearly with velocity; whereas kinetic friction is normally a constant, but on ice may become reduced with speed as it transitions to lubricated friction with melting.
Ways to reduce wave-making resistance used on sailing vessels include reduced displacement—through planing or (as with a windsurfer) offsetting vessel weight with a lifting sail—and fine entry, as with catamarans, where a narrow hull minimizes the water displaced into a bow wave. Sailing hydrofoils also substantially reduce forward friction with an underwater foil that lifts the vessel free of the water.

Sailing craft with low forward resistance and high lateral resistance.

Sailing craft with low forward resistance can achieve high velocities with respect to the wind velocity:
High-performance catamarans, including the Extreme 40 catamaran and International C-class catamaran can sail at speeds up to twice the speed of the wind.
Sailing hydrofoils achieve boat speeds up to twice the speed of the wind, as did the AC72 catamarans used for the 2013 America's Cup.
Ice boats can sail up to five times the speed of the wind.
Lateral force is a reaction supplied by the underwater shape of a sailboat, the blades of an ice boat and the wheels of a land sailing craft. Sailboats rely on keels, centerboards, and other underwater foils, including rudders, that provide lift in the lateral direction, to provide hydrodynamic lateral force (PLAT) to offset the lateral force component acting on the sail (FLAT) and minimize leeway. Such foils provide hydrodynamic lift and, for keels, ballast to offset heeling. They incorporate a wide variety of design considerations.