When sailing craft are on a course where the angle of attack between the sail and the apparent wind (α ) exceeds the point of maximum lift on the CL–CD polar diagram, separation of flow occurs. The separation becomes more pronounced until at α = 90° lift becomes small and drag predominates. In addition to the sails used upwind, spinnakers provide area and curvature appropriate for sailing with separated flow on downwind points of sail.

Polar diagrams, showing lift (L), drag (D), total aerodynamic force (FT), forward driving force (FR), and lateral force (FLAT) for downwind points of sail

Again, in these diagrams the direction of travel changes with respect to the apparent wind (VA), which is constant for the sake of illustration, but would in reality vary with point of sail for a constant true wind. In the left-hand diagram (broad reach), the boat is on a point of sail, where the sail can no longer be aligned into the apparent wind to create an optimum angle of attack. Instead, the sail is in a stalled condition, creating about 80% of the lift as in the upwind examples and drag has doubled. Total aerodynamic force (FT) has moved away from the maximum lift value. In the right-hand diagram (running before the wind), lift is one-fifth of the upwind cases (for the same strength apparent wind) and drag has almost quadrupled.

Downwind sailing with a spinnaker

A velocity prediction program can translate sail performance and hull characteristics into a polar diagram, depicting boat speed for various windspeeds at each point of sail. Displacement sailboats exhibit a change in what course has the best velocity made good (VMG), depending on windspeed. For the example given, the sailboat achieves best downwind VMG for windspeed of 10 knots and less at a course about 150° off the wind. For higher windspeed the optimum downwind VMG occurs at more than 170° off the wind. This "downwind cliff" (abrupt change in optimum downwind course) results from the change of balance in drag forces on the hull with speed.