Each sailing craft is a system that mobilizes wind force through its sails—supported by spars and rigging—which provide motive power and reactive force from the underbody of a sailboat—including the keel, centerboard, rudder or other underwater foils—or the running gear of an ice boat or land craft, which allows it to be kept on a course. Without the ability to mobilize reactive forces in directions different from the wind direction, a craft would simply be adrift before the wind.
Accordingly, motive and heeling forces on sailing craft are either components of or reactions to the total aerodynamic force (FT) on sails, which is a function of apparent wind velocity (VA) and varies with point of sail. The forward driving force (FR) component contributes to boat velocity (VB), which is, itself, a determinant of apparent wind velocity. Absent lateral reactive forces to FT from a keel (in water), a skate runner (on ice) or a wheel (on land), a craft would only be able to move downwind and the sail would not be able to develop lift.
At a stable angle of heel (for a sailboat) and a steady speed, aerodynamic and hydrodynamic forces are in balance. Integrated over the sailing craft, the total aerodynamic force (FT) is located at the centre of effort (CE), which is a function of the design and adjustment of the sails on a sailing craft. Similarly, the total hydrodynamic force (Fl) is located at the centre of lateral resistance (CLR), which is a function of the design of the hull and its underwater appendages (keel, rudder, foils, etc.). These two forces act in opposition to one another with Fl a reaction to FT.
Whereas ice boats and land-sailing craft resist lateral forces with their wide stance and high-friction contact with the surface, sailboats travel through water, which provides limited resistance to side forces. In a sailboat, side forces are resisted in two ways:
Leeway: Leeway is the rate of travel perpendicular to the course. It is constant when the lateral force on the sail (FLAT) equals the lateral force on the boat's keel and other underwater appendages (PLAT). This causes the boat to travel through the water on a course that is different from the direction in which the boat is pointed by the angle (λ ), which is called the "leeway angle."
Heeling: The heeling angle (θ) is constant when the torque between the centre of effort (CE) on the sail and the centre of resistance on the hull (CR) over moment arm (h) equals the torque between the boat's centre of buoyancy (CB) and its centre of gravity (CG) over moment arm (b), described as heeling moment.
All sailing craft reach a constant forward speed (VB) for a given wind speed (VT) and point of sail, when the forward driving force (FR) equals the forward resisting force (Rl). For an ice boat, the dominant forward resisting force is aerodynamic, since the coefficient of friction on smooth ice is as low as 0.02. Accordingly, high-performance ice boats are streamlined to minimize aerodynamic drag.

Aerodynamic forces in balance with hydrodynamic forces on a close-hauled sailboat