The mechanism of bullet disintegration varies with the energy transfer at the time of impact. With sufficient velocity, bullets may be vaporized upon impact. Few firearms can propel bullets at sufficient velocity to cause reliable vaporization at the target, and air resistance causes bullet velocity to decrease with increasing distance from the firing point; so frangible bullets typically rely upon other mechanisms for disintegration at lower velocities. Target characteristics are an important aspect of interaction with the bullet. Energy available to initiate the disintegration mechanism is limited by the rate at which the target slows the bullet; so bullets may pass through flexible, fragile or low-density materials without slowing the bullet enough to cause disintegration. Bullets must resist disintegration during handling, loading, and firing to reliably hit the target; so high-velocity loads may require a non-frangible jacket to protect a frangible core from disintegration prior to target impact. The jacket may ricochet, but should have reduced range without the weight of the frangible core. Frangible hollow-point bullets may penetrate clothing, drywall, and light sheet metal; but often disintegrate upon striking glass.
Hard targets may be damaged by frangible bullets. Extent of damage increases with velocity of bullet impact. Energy transfer at the point of impact may break brittle targets, and may temporarily soften and permanently deform malleable materials. Target crystalline structure may be changed to increase target damage by subsequent bullets. Steel targets designed to withstand rifle ammunition may be damaged by bullet velocities over 2,700 feet (820 m) per second; and lower velocity bullets may damage steel targets intended for pistol or rimfire ammunition.
Frangible bullets striking animal targets create wounds similar to conventional bullets. Some penetrate soft tissue similar to full metal jacket bullets. Some may disintegrate upon striking bone. Hunting bullets include a frangible core designed to disintegrate when a protective jacket is opened by softer tissue or fluid. Frangible bullets disintegrating in flesh cause very serious wounds with persistent effects.
Frangible bullets may represent an unconventional threat to personal armor intended to resist traditional lead bullets. At the request of the National Institute of Justice, staff of the Office of Law Enforcement Standards, located at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, has conducted a limited series of tests evaluating the performance of frangible ammunition against body armor. This preliminary study was designed to attempt to establish the validity of claims that these types of rounds pose a potential safety threat to personal body armor. The true scope and relevance of this threat was not known as of November 2002.