An FBD represents the body of interest and the external forces on it.
The body: This is usually sketched in a schematic way depending on the body - particle/extended, rigid/non-rigid - and on what questions are to be answered. Thus if rotation of the body and torque is in consideration, an indication of size and shape of the body is needed. For example, the brake dive of a motorcycle cannot be found from a single point, and a sketch with finite dimensions is required.
The external forces: These are indicated by labelled arrows. In a fully solved problem, a force arrow is capable of indicating
the direction and the line of action
the magnitude
the point of application.
a reaction as opposed to an applied load if a hash is present through the arrow

Typically, however, a provisional free body sketch is drawn before all these things are known. After all, the whole point of the diagram is to help to determine magnitude, direction, and point of application of the external loads! Thus when a force arrow is originally drawn its length may not be meant to indicate the unknown magnitude. Its line may not correspond to the exact line of action. Even its direction may turn out to be wrong. Very often the original direction of the arrow may be directly opposite to the true direction. External forces known to be small that are known to have negligible effect on the result of the analysis, are sometimes omitted, but only after careful consideration or after other analysis proving it (e.g. buoyancy forces of the air in the analysis of a chair, or atmospheric pressure on the analysis of a frying pan).
The external; forces acting on the object include friction, gravity, normal force, drag, tension, or a human force due to pushing or pulling. When in a non-inertial reference frame (see coordinate system, below), fictitious forces, such as centrifugal pseudoforce are appropriate.
A coordinate system is sometimes included, and is chosen according to convenience (or advantage). Savvy selection of coordinate frame may make defining the vectors simpler when writing the equations of motion. The x direction might be chosen to point down the ramp in an inclined plane problem, for example. In that case the friction force only has an x component, and the normal force only has a y component. The force of gravity will still have components in both the x and y direction: mgsin(θ) in the x and mgcos(θ) in the y, where θ is the angle between the ramp and the horizontal.