Each Fresnel zone is defined by the phase-shift (or lack thereof) which ultimately occurs when a transmitted sine wave deflects off an object within that region and continues onward to the receiver. These regions can be important to take into account because a sine wave following one of these paths may arrive at the receiver out of sync with the line-of-sight sine wave by anywhere from 1ยบ to 359ยบ of phase shift. If an object is within a particular Fresnel zone region, a part of the original signal which is not moving towards the receiving antenna and would otherwise have continued onward into space, may be partially deflected by that object back to the receiving antenna. The deflected signal can result in constructive interference or destructive interference at the receiver, depending on the path length and the resulting degree of phase shift in the deflected wave as it arrives at the receiver.
This is the cause of the picket-fencing effect when either the radio transmitter or receiver is moving, and the high and low signal strength zones are above and below the receiver's cut-off threshold. The extreme variations of signal strength at the receiver can cause interruptions in the communications link, or even prevent a signal from being received at all.
Fresnel zones are seen in optics, radio communications, electrodynamics, seismology, acoustics, gravitational radiation, and other situations involving the radiation of waves and multipath propagation. Fresnel zone computations are used to anticipate obstacle clearances required when designing highly directive systems such as microwave parabolic antenna systems. Although intuitively, line-of-sight between transmitter and receiver seems to be all that is required for a strong antenna system, because of to the complex nature of radio waves, obstructions within the first Fresnel zone can cause significant weakness, even if those obstructions are not blocking the line-of-sight signal path. For this reason, it is valuable to do a calculation of the size of the 1st, or primary, Fresnel zone for a given antenna system. Doing this will enable the antenna installer to decide if an obstacle, such as a tree, is going to make a significant impact on signal strength. The rule of thumb is that the primary Fresnel zone would ideally be 80% clear of obstacles, but must be at least 60% clear.