As explained earlier, the Fresnel zone can be used to determine whether the bounced signal will be received in-phase or out-of-phase, but the transmitted polarization of a radio-frequency (RF) signal can greatly influence what actually happens at the receiving end of the transmission. Regarding polarization, an RF signal can be transmitted in different ways.
Linear polarization — the sine wave moves on a plane
Vertical polarization — the sine wave moves on a vertical plane
Horizontal polarization — the sine wave moves on a horizontal plane

Circular polarization — the sine wave moves in a tight three-dimensional helix as it leaves the transmitting antenna
RHCP (right-hand circular polarization) — the sine wave moves clockwise as it leaves the transmitter
LHCP (left-hand circular polarization) — the sine wave moves counter-clockwise

If a signal is vertically polarized and it deflects off a horizontal object such as a flat roof, and then bounces up to a receiving antenna, and if the roof is within the 1st region of the Fresnel zone, the resulting signal will be inverted relative to the original signal. This means the high points of the sine wave are now low points, and vice versa. Hence, even though one would expect minimal change in phase in the first Fresnel region, the bounced signal will arrive out-of-phase, which will weaken the received signal. So, the installer of the antenna system must take this into consideration and either move the transmitting antenna, receiving antenna, or both, to minimize or remove the interfering roof-deflected phase-shifted signal. Or, the installer can increase the height of either one or both the transmitting and receiving antenna so that the object (roof) that is deflecting the signal is in the 2nd region rather than the 1st (the inverted signal would behave as if it was right side up by the time it reached the receiver because of to the half-wave phase shift in region 2). Or, the installer can simply change the polarization to horizontal.
If a signal is horizontally polarized and it deflects off a horizontal object such as a flat roof, and then bounces up to a receiving antenna, and if the roof is within the 1st region of the Fresnel zone, the resulting signal will be received favorably - as it will be in-phase. The left and right extremes of the sine wave will not be negatively impacted by the deflection of the roof. In fact, this will result in a stronger signal than if there was no deflection.
For an analogy to more easily understand the differences in deflected vertically and horizontally polarized signals, place a mirror on the floor in the middle of a room. Have somebody hold a flashlight on the other side of the room. The flashlight represents a signal and your eyes are the receiver. The mirror represents a flat roof within region 1 of the Fresnel zone. Have the flashlight move up and down representing vertical polarization. Note that in the mirror, the flashlight moves in the opposite direction, that is, it moves down and up rather than up and down. This is out-of-phase. Now have the flashlight move to the left and right representing horizontal polarization. If you look in the mirror, the reflected image of the flashlight moves exactly in tandem with the actual flashlight. Left is left, right is right. This is in-phase.
If the system/signal is circular polarized, the Fresnel zone will have no effect, because a deflected circular polarized signal changes rotation upon deflection and the result is to become virtually invisible to the receiver, regardless of whether is arrives in phase or out of phase. For example, a RHCP signal that hits a street, or a wall, or anything else, then becomes a LHCP signal, and is therefore invisible to the RHCP receiving antenna, regardless of whether it arrives at the receiver in-phase or out-of-phase.
Numerous examples can be made regarding the different regions of the Fresnel zone and whether the obstacles providing bounce are sides of buildings (vertical), or streets/flat roofs (horizontal). But the same logic regarding polarization and its effects applies to the 2nd region, 3rd region, and so forth.