centers. Consequently, networks of antennas sprinkle the countryside (each located on the highest hill
possible) to provide long-distance wireless communications: Each antenna receives energy from one antenna
and retransmits to another. This kind of network is known as a relay network.
6.6 The Ionosphere and Communications7
If we were limited to line-of-sight communications, long distance wireless communication, like ship-to-shore
communication, would be impossible. At the turn of the century, Marconi, the inventor of wireless telegraphy,
boldly tried such long distance communication without any evidence — either empirical or theoretical —
that it was possible. When the experiment worked, but only at night, physicists scrambled to determine
why (using Maxwell’s equations, of course). It was Oliver Heaviside, a mathematical physicist with strong
engineering interests, who hypothesized that an invisible electromagnetic “mirror” surrounded the earth.
What he meant was that at optical frequencies (and others as it turned out), the mirror was transparent,
but at the frequencies Marconi used, it reﬂected electromagnetic radiation back to earth. He had predicted
the existence of the ionosphere, a plasma that encompasses the earth at altitudes hi between 80 and 180 km
that reacts to solar radiation: It becomes transparent at Marconi’s frequencies during the day, but becomes
a mirror at night when solar radiation diminishes. The maximum distance along the earth’s surface that
can be reached by a single ionospheric reﬂection is 2R cos−1
, which ranges between 2,010 and
3,000 km when we substitute minimum and maximum ionospheric altitudes. This distance does not span
the United States or cross the Atlantic; for transatlantic communication, at least two reﬂections would be
2
required. The communication delay encountered with a single reﬂection in this channel is 2
which ranges between 6.8 and 10 ms, again a small time interval.
6.7 Communication with Satellites8
Global wireless communication relies on satellites. Here, ground stations transmit to orbiting satellites that
amplify the signal and retransmit it back to earth. Satellites will move across the sky unless they are in
geosynchronous orbits, where the time for one revolution about the equator exactly matches the earth’s
rotation time of one day. TV satellites would require the homeowner to continually adjust his or her antenna
if the satellite weren’t in geosynchronous orbit. Newton’s equations applied to orbiting bodies predict that
the time T for one orbit is related to distance from the earth’s center R as