Internally, communication networks do have point-to-point communication links between network nodes
well described by the Fundamental Model of Communications. However, many messages share the com-
munications channel between nodes using what we call time-domain multiplexing: Rather than the
continuous communications mode implied in the Model as presented, message sequences are sent, sharing
in time the channel’s capacity. At a grander viewpoint, the network must route messages—decide what
nodes and links to use—based on destination information—the address—that is usually separate from the
message information. Routing in networks is necessarily dynamic: The complete route taken by messages is
formed as the network handles the message, with nodes relaying the message having some notion of the best
possible path at the time of transmission. Note that no omnipotent router views the network as a whole and
pre-determines every message’s route. Certainly in the case of the postal system dynamic routing occurs,
and can consider issues like inoperative and overly busy links. In the telephone system, routing takes place
when you place the call; the route is ﬁxed once the phone starts ringing. Modern communication networks
strive to achieve the most eﬃcient (timely) and most reliable information delivery system possible.
6.34 Message Routing43
Focusing on electrical networks, most analog ones make ineﬃcient use of communication links because truly
dynamic routing is diﬃcult, if not impossible, to obtain. In radio networks, such as commercial television,
each station has a dedicated portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, and this spectrum cannot be shared
with other stations or used in any other than the regulated way. The telephone network is more dynamic,
but once it establishes a call the path through the network is ﬁxed. The users of that path control its
use, and may not make eﬃcient use of it (long pauses while one person thinks, for example). Telephone
network customers would be quite upset if the telephone company momentarily disconnected the path so
that someone else could use it. This kind of connection through a network—ﬁxed for the duration of the
communication session—is known as a circuit-switched connection.