Living characters in Fuzion can take two kinds of damage; Lethal Damage, (that subtracts Hits), or Stun Damage, that subtracts Stun points. When Hits fall to zero, a character is unconscious and may be dying. Losing further Hits can kill a character if it should fall twice below their Body Stat, that is, a character with Body 5, (and 25 Hits), dies when his Hits fall to -10. When Stun falls to zero, a character is out cold. At this point, any further damage becomes Stun Rollover at 1/5 the Stun damage and begin deducting from their Hits. When a character loses 1/2 of their Hits, all their stats drop by 2. If 3/4 Hits are lost, all stats drop by 4.
Inanimate objects, have Structural Damage Points or SDPs. When an object loses all its SDPs, it is rendered useless; (a vehicle shuts down and grinds to a halt, a weapon will no longer fire, etc.). It is destroyed when it reaches twice its SDPs in damage. To keep things simple, (and avoid rolling lots of dice), large scale weapons inflict points of damage called Kills, which represent destruction on a much larger scale. Kills are used for such things as giant mecha robots and spaceships. Weapons that inflict Kill damage are not usually small enough to be carried around by characters.
Character sized weapons in Fuzion have Damage Classes, or (DCs). Each point of DC represents a six-sided die that is rolled to see how much damage the weapon can cause. Six-sided dice are always used for damage rolls, regardless of using a d10 (or other die types) for checks. For instance, a light weight handgun typically has a DC of 3; meaning 3d6 is rolled to determine the damage it causes when it hits something. Some weapons also have a Weapon Accuracy (WA) value. This number is further added to the Attack roll and raise the chances of getting a successful hit.
Melee weapon sometimes have a Minimum Strength value. This is an optional rule to add more realism. A character must possess the listed minimum level of STR to fully inflict the weapon's damage. For every point of STR under the minimum, the weapon does one less die of damage. For example: A Battleaxe has a DC 5 and a Minimum STR of 5. A character with an STR 3, that uses the Battleaxe, suffers a -2 penalty to his Attack roll. It will also only inflict DC 3 of damage because the character's STR is 2 less than the minimum of 5. The character also suffers a -2 penalty to any Reflex checks and Reflex-based Skill checks when wielding the weapon.
For unarmed physical damage, a character deals 1 DC of punching damage per level of STR Stat, that is, a character with STR 3 does 3 DC of damage. Kicking adds an additional DC, that is, with a STR of 3, a character deals 4 DC of damage with a kick.
Some Fuzion campaigns offer an optional Hit Location Chart where 3d6 is rolled to determine what specific part of the body is hit by an attack. Depending on the location, the damage may be modified. For instance, if damage is applied to the head, the damage taken is doubled. If a hand is struck, the damage is halved. Using Hit Locations allows Called Shots with a -4 penalty to an attack roll to strike a specific area.