The Gaia catalogue is released in stages that will contain increasing amounts of information; the early releases will also miss some stars, especially fainter stars located in dense star fields. The first data release, Gaia DR1, based on 14 months of observations made through September 2015, took place on 14 September 2016 and is described in a series of articles published in Astronomy and Astrophysics. The data release includes "positions and … magnitudes for 1.1 billion stars using only Gaia data; positions, parallaxes and proper motions for more than 2 million stars" based on a combination of Gaia and Tycho-2 data for those objects in both catalogues; "light curves and characteristics for about 3000 variable stars; and positions and magnitudes for more than 2000 … extragalactic sources used to define the celestial reference frame". Data from this DR1 release can be accessed at the Gaia archive, as well as through astronomical data centers such as CDS.
The second data release (DR2), currently scheduled for 25 April 2018, will be based on on 22 months of observations made between 25 July 2014 and 23 May 2016. It will include positions, parallaxes and proper motions for about 1.3 billion stars and positions of an additional 200 million stars, red and blue photometric data for about 1.1 billion stars and single colour photometry for an additional 400 million stars, and radial velocity measurements for about 6 million stars. It will also contain data for over 13,000 selected Solar System objects. The third data release potentially will include orbital solutions for many binary stars and classifications for spectroscopically "well behaved" objects, as well as improved positions, parallaxes and proper motions. The fourth data release potentially will include variable star classifications, complete Solar System results, and non single-star catalogues. The complete final Gaia catalogue is currently scheduled for 2022, three years after the end of the nominal five-year mission. It would be pushed back if the mission is extended to nine years. The number of releases between DR2 and the final release has not yet been decided.
An outreach application, Gaia Sky, has been developed to explore the galaxy in three dimensions using Gaia data.