Operation of the Allison Transmission (AHS-2), or Two-Mode Hybrid, from the Global Hybrid Cooperation. This transmission is mounted on the BMW ActiveHybrid and the Mercedes-Benz ML450 BlueHybrid.

First Power Split Mode, also known as Input-Split:
(clutches C1 engaged, C2+C3+C4 released)
The first planetary gearset pair acts as a four-driveshaft power-split transmission, and the last planetary gearset reduces the rotational speed. The second motor-generator (MG-B) rotational speed is proportional to the output driveshaft.
Second Power Split Mode, aka Compound-Split:
(clutches C2 engaged, C1+C3+C4 released)
The first planetary gearset pair acts as a four-driveshaft power-split transmission. No motor-generator is directly coupled with input or output.
First Fixed Gear ratio:
(clutches C1+C4 engaged, C2+C3 released)
The first planetary gearset pair is maintained in a synchronous 1:1 fixed gear ratio by shunt C4 clutch action, and the last planetary gearset reduces the rotational speed. Both motor-generators are mutually synchronous, either both as motors, or both as generators. It's the midpoint of the first continuously variable range, when both motor-generators rotational speed join.
Second Fixed Gear ratio:
(clutches C1+C2 engaged, C3+C4 released)
The last planetary gearset force the first pair into an intermediate fixed gear ratio. The rotational speed of both motor-generators are very asymmetric (1:9), excluding effective usage of the first one (MG-A). It's the boundary between both continuously variable ranges. The two-modes switching occurs at this point, when the third planetary gearset ring gear reach zero rotational speed, and all the planetary gearset carriers gears reach the same rotational speed together.
Third Fixed Gear ratio:
(clutches C2+C4 engaged, C1+C3 released)
The first planetary gearset pair are in a synchronous 1:1 fixed gear ratio by C4 clutch action, and, by the way, both motor-generators are mutually synchronous, either all as motor, or all as generator. It's the midpoint of the second continuously variable range, when both motor-generators rotational speed join.
Fourth Fixed Gear ratio:
(clutches C2+C3 engaged, C1+C4 released)
The third C3 clutch block the first planetary gearset sun gear, and the second motor-generator (MG-B) still off-line.