safety factor
A figure denoting the overload (and allowance thereof) a device can withstand before breaking down.
sample rate
Measurement rate that the A/D converter updates, expressed in samples per second. Lower values are more immune to noise.
scale

A device that is used for weighing, comparing and determining the weight or mass of an object or material.

sense
Compensates for the resistance changes in the copper wiring, by comparing the supplied excitation voltage to the applied excitation voltage at the load cell.
sensitivity
The ratio of the change in output to the change in mechanical input.
sensitivity drift
A term used to express how temperature changes can affect the performance of the balance.
serial transmission

A data transmission method in which each bit of information is sent in a sequence on a single channel.

setpoint
In a feedback control loop, the point which determines the desired value of the quantity being controlled.
shear beam
A bending beam load cell, in which the strain gauges are mounted on a thin web of material in a machined-out cavity within the cell.
shield
A component used to protect the signal from RFI/EMI, which needs to be grounded at one end. The shield wire is not connected to the load cell housing, but terminates at the indicator instead.
shift test
A test intended to disclose the weighing performance of a scale under off-center loading.
side load
Any load acting 90° to the primary axis, at the point of axial load applications.
signal
The actual millivolt output of the load cell, with signal wires connected to the A/D of the indicator. It is here where the analog signal is converted to digital, and signal strength is expressed in microvolts per graduation.
signal in-line package (SIP)
A flat, molded component package with terminal lugs along one side; half of a dual in-line package (DIP).
signal trim
A method of matching load cell outputs in a multicell system, by adjusting the output signal voltage through a variable resistor placed across the signal leads.
span
The difference between the highest and lowest values.
span calibration
Utilizing two calibration points; one at zero and a choice of either half capacity or full capacity.
stabilization period
The time required to ensure that any further change in the parameter being measured is tolerable.
stack
A temporary storage area (consisting of a small group of registers) in a computer memory. Data stored in it is retrieved in reverse of the order in which it is stored.
standard test conditions
The environmental conditions under which measurements should be made, when measurements under any other conditions may result in disagreement between various observers at different times and places. These conditions are: Temperature: 72 degrees plus 3.6 degrees F (23 degrees plus or minus 2 degrees C), Barometric Pressure: 28 to 32 inches Hg.
static overload capacity
A percentage of nominal load limit capacity, up to which limit the load cell can safely be loaded without adverse effects on performance, or any change in its zero balance and other specifications.
stay rods
Rods installed to rigidly restrain a vessel or other weighing system component in the horizontal position, with little effect on the system's accuracy when they are installed properly.
strain gauge
A device for detecting the strain that a certain force produces on a body. The gauge consists of one or more fine wires that are cemented to the surface under test, and the wires stretch or compress as the surface becomes strained, changing their resistance. Several strain gauges are used to make up a load cell.