mass

The quantity of matter in a body, usually measured by weight.

megohmmeter

(Also megger); a special ohmmeter for measuring resistances in the megohm (106 ohms) range.

metal film resistor (MFR)

A fixed or variable resistor in which the resistance element is a thin or thick film of a metal alloy deposited on a substrate made of plastic or ceramic material.
metal oxide varistor (MOV)

A voltage-dependent resistor whose resistance predictably changes with voltage applied, and is used as a shunt protection device in transient protectors.

micro-
A prefix meaning millionths (10−6). Symbol: "m", used as a combining form only ("m" by itself means meter).
microvolts per graduation
The number of microvolts of live load signal that are needed to change the display.
minimum dead load
Specified for NTEP load cells. In a given application, the dead load applied to each cell must be greater than or equal to the minimum dead load as specified by the load cell manufacturer.
minimum verification interval (Vmin)
A parameter used to select load cells for NTEP-approved applications. For single cell applications, Vmin is "the smallest interval into which the load cell measuring range can be divided." Thus, it must be less than or equal to the scale division size. for mechanical scale conversions using one load cell, Vmin must be less than or equal to the scale division size divided by the scale multiple. For a scale using more than one load cell, Vmin must be less than or equal to the scale division divided by the square root of the number of cells. While given in proper form Vmin, is it commonly also written "Vmin" or "v-min". See also Emin (minimum verification scale divisions).
minimum weight
The piece weight required in counting mode and normally used with counting scales.
motion band
Sets the level in display divisions that motion is detected. If motion is not detected for 1 second, the standstill annunciator lights. Certain functions like Tare, Zero, and Print are prohibited while the scale is in motion.
motion detection

A circuit that is used in an indicator to sense when displayed weight data is changing at a greater rate than preset limits (or is unstable), and to inhibit certain functions (like data output, entry of a push-button auto zero, entry of an auto tare value or activation of zero tracking) during this time.