parallel circuit

A circuit in which the components are connected across each other, and equal voltage is applied to each component.

parallel communications

Data communication type where all elements in an information item (bits in a word) are acted upon simultaneously, instead of one at a time (as in serial communications).

parity
A method of error checking where an extra bit is sent to establish an even or odd number of ones in the data of a character.
poise
A moveable weight that is used to counterbalance the load on a scale.
port
A point at which signals may be introduced to or extracted from a circuit, device, or system.
potentiometer

A variable resistor that is employed as a voltage divider.

potted cell
An environmentally-sealed load cell where the strain gauge cavity is filled with a material that protects the gauges from moisture and other environmental hazards. The potting material must not interfere with normal strain gauge movement, and must allow the gauges to return to their normal zero output position.
preact
Weight value which is set to allow for material in suspension during a filling operation.
pressurization
The process of supplying an enclosure with clean air or an inert gas, with or without continuous flow at sufficient pressure, to prevent the entrance of combustible dust.
primary axis
The axis along which the load cell is designed to be loaded, normally the geometric centerline of the load cell.
protective component
A component or assembly that is so unlikely to become defective (in a manner that will lower the intrinsic safety of the circuit), that it may be considered not subject to fault during analysis or tests for intrinsic safety.
purging
The process of supplying clean air or an inert gas in an enclosure, at sufficient flow and positive pressure to reduce the concentration of any flammable gases or vapors initially present (to an acceptable safe level), and to maintain this safe level by positive pressure with or without continuous flow.
push-button auto zero (PAZ)
Extension of a digital weight indicator's AZM function through the use of a front panel push-button.