D (division)
Value of the smallest increment that is indicated (displayed) by a scale's divisions.
dash pot
A dampening device that is used to reduce scale oscillations.
dead load
The fixed force of load-supporting structures of the scale (like the weigh bridge or platform), the value of which needs to be permanently balanced or cancelled out in the weight or measuring system.
decimal point

Determines the location of the decimal point or number of dummy zeros for the graduation size. E.g., 8888.88 would have two places to the right of the decimal point, 888880 would have one dummy zero.

deflection
Change in length along the primary axis of the load cell between no-load and rated load conditions.
demand mode
Transmission of serial output data, which needs a manual "Print" command to initiate the output data. It is usually used to interface indicators to printers.
numerical digit

The smallest increment of weight that the indicator resolves.

digital

A system of signal representation that employs discrete values instead of continuously variable (analog) values.

digital averaging
A digital indicator's ability to smooth bouncy or erratic readings before sending the signal to the display, by taking several readings and averaging them together. Increasing the digital averaging slows the indicator's update rate.
digital filtering
Used to stabilize the readout of the indicator. More digital filtering applied leads to a more accurate display reading, but a longer settling time is required.
display divisions
Selects the minimum division size for the displayed weight of primary units, and determines if the count by will be 1, 2, or 5.
divisions
Determines the amount of increments in weight that a scale offers.
dormant scale
A built-in weighing scale with a self-contained understructure.
dot matrix

A method of printing where a rectangular array (matrix) of spaces is filled in to form alphanumeric and punctuation characters.

dribble
The weight value over which material is slowly handled to provide a more accurate cutoff in filling operations.
drift
A continuously upward or downward change in the number displayed on the digital readout, which could occur due to temperature, static electricity or radio frequency interference (RFI).
dropout
A temporary loss of electrical power, which is normally caused by break-before-make switching strategies used in utility and maintenance switching functions.
dual in-line package (DIP)

An integrated circuit contained within a standard housing characterized by its low profile, rectangular body, and symmetrical placement of leads along two opposing sides the device.