tare
The weight of an empty container or vehicle, or the allowance or deduction from gross weight made on account thereof (typically a compensating adjustment to a scale to return it to zero with the container on the scale).
temperature coefficient
A figure that states the extent to which a quantity drifts under the influence of temperature. voltage surge.
temperature effect, on rated output
The change in rated output caused by a change in ambient temperature, normally expressed as the percentage change in rated output per 100 °F change in ambient temperature.
temperature effect, on zero balance
The change in zero balance caused by a change in ambient temperature, normally expressed as the change in zero balance in percent of rated output per 100 °F change in ambient temperature.
temperature range, compensated
The range of temperatures over which a load cell is compensated to maintain rated output and zero balance, within specific limits.
temperature range, safe
The extremes of temperatures within which a load cell will operate without permanent adverse changes to any of its performance characteristics.
terminal resistance, corner-to-corner
The resistance of the load cell circuit, which is measured at specific adjacent bridge terminals at standard temperature with no load applied, and with open-circuited excitation and output terminals.
terminal resistance, input (excitation)
The resistance of the load cell circuit, which is measured at the excitation terminals at standard temperature with no load applied, and with open-circuited output (signal) terminals.
terminal resistance, output (signal)
The resistance of the load cell circuit, which is measured at the output signal terminals at standard temperature with no load applied, and with open-circuited excitation terminals.
tolerance
The amount of error that is allowed in a value, normally expressed as a percent of nominal value, plus or minus "x" measurement units.
traceability
The step-by-step transfer process by which the load cell calibration can be related to primary standards.
transducer
A piece of equipment that can convert energy from one form to another.
transient
A momentary surge on a signal or power line, which may produce false signals or triggering impulses, and cause insulation or component breakdowns and failures.
triac
A three-terminal silicon switching device that is gate controlled and bidirectional, which can switch either alternating or direct currents.
trim
To make a fine adjustment, such as in the outputs of load cells in a multicell system.