Initiation of a go-around procedure may be either ordered by air traffic control (normally the local or tower controller in a controlled field) or decided by the pilot in command of the aircraft.
At a towered field, the local controller may instruct the pilot to go around if there is an unsafe condition such as an aircraft, vehicle, or object on the runway. The pilot in command may decide to go around at any time, for example, if the aircraft is not lined up or configured properly for a safe landing; an aircraft, vehicle or other object has not cleared the runway; no landing clearance was received (at a towered field); the landing gear is not properly extended; a dangerous meteorological condition is experienced on final approach (e.g., poor visibility, excessive cross-winds, windshear, etc.); excessive energy (too high or too fast); or any other unsafe condition is detected.
In naval aviation, the term wave-off is used instead of go-around. When touching down on an aircraft carrier, a pilot always initiates a wave-off by applying full thrust as a fail-safe measure. That way, if the plane's tailhook fails to catch any of the arrestor cables (known as a (deck) "bolter") the aircraft can climb again. If the tailhook catches a cable, the aircraft will stop in short order regardless. Conversely, if a wave-off were not initiated and the aircraft were not arrested, it would not have enough power and/or runway to fly off the carrier safely.
A go-around does not in itself constitute any sort of emergency (although it could be in response to an emergency). A properly executed go-around is a routine, safe, and well-practiced maneuver.
Many airlines and aircraft operators state a list of conditions that must be satisfied so that a safe landing can be carried out. If one or more of these conditions cannot be satisfied then a go-around should be considered in some cases and must be carried out in others. This list is usually written in the operations manual which has to be approved by the relevant aviation authority (CAA in the UK, FAA in the United States). The operator's list of conditions is not exhaustive; pilots use their individual judgment outside of this scope.