In physical therapy, occupational therapy and athletic training, a goniometer is an instrument which measures range of motion joint angles of the body. This measurement instrument is a helpful, clinical tool that allows for objective measurements in order to accurately track progress in a rehabilitation program. When a patient has a decreased range of motion, a therapist will assess the joint before performing an intervention and will continue to use the tool to make sure that progress is made. These range of motion measurements can be taken at any joint and they typically involve some knowledge about the anatomy of the body, particularly bony landmarks. For example, when measuring the knee joint, the axis (point of rotation) would be placed on the lateral epicondyle of the femur, while the stationary arm would be lined up with the greater trochanter of the femur. Finally, the moveable arm of the goniometer would be lined up with the lateral malleolus of the fibula and a measurement will be taken using the degree scale on the circular portion of the tool. The only problem with goniometers is the accuracy of the reading is not always the greatest. Issues with the intra-measure (between measures) and inter-tester (between clinicians) reliability seem to increase as the experience of the examiner decreases. Some studies suggest that these errors can be anywhere between 5 and 10 degrees when completing repeated measures.
These goniometers do come in different forms that some would argue will actually increase the reliability of the tool. The universal standard goniometer is a plastic or metal tool with 1 degree increments. The arms usually are not longer than 12-inches so it can be hard to accurately pinpoint the exact landmark needed for measurement. A more reliable goniometer would be the telescopic-armed goniometer. There is a plastic circular axis as a classic goniometer but the arms extend out to as long as two feet in either direction.
More recently in the twenty-first century, smartphone application developers have created mobile applications that are intended to perform like a goniometer. These applications (such as Knee Goniometer and Goniometer Pro) use the accelerometers in phones to calculate the angles of the joints measured. There has been a lot of research recently that supports these applications and their devices as reliable and valid tools that have just as much accuracy as a universal goniometer.
Modern rehabilitative therapy motion capture systems perform goniometry at the very least measuring active range of motion. While in some cases accuracy may be inferior to using a goniometer, measuring angles using a motion capture system is superior in providing measurement during dynamic, as opposed to static situations. Furthermore, use of a traditional goniometer takes valuable time. In the clinical context, performing manual measurements takes valuable time and may not be practical.