A small Mars forms in a small but non-zero fraction of simulations of terrestrial planet accretion that begin with planetesimals distributed across the entire inner Solar System. If the accretion of the terrestrial planets occurred with Jupiter and Saturn in their present orbits (i.e. after the instability in the Nice model) a local depletion of the planetesimal disk near Mars's current orbit is sufficient for the formation of a low-mass Mars. A planetesimal disk with a steep surface density profile, due to the inward drift of solids before the formation of planetesimals, also results in a small Mars and a low mass asteroid belt. If the gas disk is flared and the pebbles are large, pebble accretion by planetesimals and embryos becomes significantly less efficient with increasing distance from the Sun, preventing the growth of objects beyond the size of Mars at its distance and leaving the asteroid belt with a small mass. Sweeping secular resonances can excite inclinations and eccentricities, resulting in fragmentation instead of accretion as collision velocities increase, inhibiting the growth of planets beyond 1 AU.
The eccentricities and inclinations of a low mass asteroid belt could have been exited by secular resonances if the resonant orbits of Jupiter and Saturn became chaotic during the period between the gas phase era and the instability of the Nice model. Secular resonances sweeping during the dissipation of the gas disk could also excite the orbits of the asteroids, and remove those outside a particular size range if they spiraled toward the Sun due to gas drag after their eccentricities were excited. The asteroid belt could also be excited and depleted by embedded embryos, either scattered inward by Jupiter, or left over from terrestrial planet formation. The former leaves the outer asteroid belt more excited than the inner asteroid belt, however, and the latter requires an additional ~90% depletion via an additional mechanism, more than in recent versions of the Nice model. If the region of the asteroid belt was initially empty it could have been populated by icy planetesimals that were scattered inward during Jupiter's and Saturn's gas accretion, and by stony asteroids that were scattered outward by the forming terrestrial planets. The inward scattered icy planetesimals could also deliver water to the terrestrial region.
The absence of inner super-Earths and the small mass of Mercury may be due to the formation of Jupiter's core close to the Sun and its outward migration across the inner Solar System. During its outward migration this core could push material outward in its resonances leaving the region inside Venus's orbit depleted. In a protoplanetary disk that is evolving via a disk wind planetary embryos may migrate outward in a leaving the Solar System without planets inside Mercury. An instability that led to catastrophic collisions between an early generational of inner planets may have resulted in the debris being ground small enough to be lost due to Poynting-Robertson drag. If planetesimal formation was limited to early in the gas disk epoch an inner edge of the planetesimal disk might be located at the silicate condensation line of this time. The magnetic field of some stars may have been aligned with the rotation of the disk, causing the gas in the inner regions of their disks to be depleted faster. This would enable the solid to gas ratio to reach values high enough for the formation of planetesimals via streaming instabilities closer than Mercury's orbit only in these systems.