In the grand tack model Jupiter undergoes a two-phase migration after its formation, migrating inward to 1.5 AU before reversing course and migrating outward. Jupiter's formation takes place near the ice line, at roughly 3.5 AU. After clearing a gap in the gas disk Jupiter undergoes type II migration, moving slowly toward the Sun with the gas disk. If uninterrupted, this migration would have left Jupiter in a close orbit around the Sun like recently discovered hot Jupiters in other planetary systems. Saturn also migrates toward the Sun, but being smaller migrates faster, undergoing either type I migration or runaway migration. Saturn converges on Jupiter and is captured in a 2:3 mean-motion resonance with Jupiter during this migration. An overlapping gap in the gas disk then forms around Jupiter and Saturn, altering the balance of forces on these planets which are now migrating together. Saturn partially clears its part of the gap reducing the torque exerted on Jupiter by the outer disk. The net torque on the planets then becomes positive, with the torques generated by the inner Lindblad resonances exceeding those from the outer disk, and the planets begin to migrate outward. The outward migration is able to continue because interactions between the planets allow gas to stream through the gap. The gas exchanges angular momentum with the planets during its passage, adding to the positive balance of torques; and transfers mass from the outer disk to the inner disk, allowing the planets to migrate outward relative to the disk. The transfer of gas to the inner disk also slows the reduction of the inner disk's mass relative to the outer disk as it accretes onto the Sun, which otherwise would weaken the inner torque, ending the planets outward migration. In the grand tack hypothesis this process is assumed to have reversed the inward migration of the planets when Jupiter is at 1.5 AU. The outward migration of Jupiter and Saturn continues until they reach a stable equilibrium if the disk is flared, or the gas disk dissipates, and is supposed to end with Jupiter near its current orbit.