Graphene is a transparent and flexible conductor that holds promise for various material/device applications, including solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LED), touch panels and smart windows or phones. For example, Graphene-based touch panel modules produced by a China-based company (2D Carbon Graphene Material Co., Ltd.) have been sold in volume to cell phone, wearable device and home appliance manufacturers.
Other early commercial uses of graphene include fillers such as a graphene-infused printer powder.
Graphene supercapacitors serve as energy storage alternative to traditional electrolytic batteries. Among advantages are fast charging, long life span and environmentally friendly production. Graphene supercapacitors produced by Skeleton Technologies have been commercially available since around 2015 and were first used in some specialized applications instead of traditional batteries. By 2017, commercial graphene supercapacitor units were available for industrial power applications, with maximal power output of 1500 kW. In 2016, Adgero announced a regenerative braking system (KERS) for large trucks that employed a graphene-based supercapacitor. In 2016, Henrik Fisker announced development of an electric car that will use Graphene supercapacitor instead of lithium-ion batteries.
Its low energy density as compared to lithium-ion batteries is being addressed. The planned electric car would target a minimum range of 400 miles (640 km). It has been announced later that the electric car produced by Fisker Inc. will still use lithium-ion batteries, but research in graphene supercapacitors will continue by Nanotech Energy Inc.
BAC's 2016 Mono model is said to be made out of graphene as a first of both a street-legal track car and a production car. The first company to use graphene-made structural parts on a production model was Spania GTA, which unveiled a version of its Spano supercar fitted with graphene in 2015.
The global market for graphene reached $9 million by 2012 with most sales in the semiconductor, electronics, battery, energy storage or conversion, and composites industries.