In speculative theories of quantum gravity, the graviton is a hypothetical elementary particle that mediates the force of gravitation in the framework of quantum field theory (QFT). In QFT, the fundamental forces are mediated by the exchange of particles, and if such a particle exists for gravity, QFT would describe all of the known forces. However, there is no complete theory of gravitons due to an outstanding mathematical problem with renormalization. Lacking such a theory, the most complete theory of gravitation is general relativity, a non-QFT system. This problem has been a major motivation for models beyond quantum field theory, such as string theory.
If it exists, the graviton is expected to be massless (because the gravitational force propagates at the speed of light) and must be a spin-2 boson. A spin-2 particle is also known as a tensor boson, compared with a spin-0 scalar boson and spin-1 vector boson. The spin follows from the fact that the source of gravitation is the stress–energy tensor, a second-order tensor (compared with electromagnetism's spin-1 photon, the source of which is the four-current, a first-order tensor). Additionally, it can be shown that any massless spin-2 field would give rise to a force indistinguishable from gravitation, because a massless spin-2 field would couple to the stress–energy tensor in the same way that gravitational interactions do. As the graviton is hypothetical, its discovery would unite quantum theory with gravity. This result suggests that, if a massless spin-2 particle is discovered, it must be the graviton.
The fundamental reason that gravitons have proved harder to model than other bosons such as photons, is that other types of bosons do not interact with other bosons of their own type. For example, photons do not interact with photons. Photons carry the electromagnetic force, but are not charged themselves and do not interact via this force. Photons have (relativistic) mass and interact with gravity, but not with their own forces. Like photons, gravitons also carry (relativistic) mass, but unlike photons and gluons, they carry the gravitational force which interacts with this mass. As well as gravitons having to thus interact with other gravitons, quantum mechanics means they must also interact with themselves via virtual particles. Understanding these interactions of gravitons' own mass with their own force is a qualitatively different kind of problem from modelling other types of bosons and is what leads to the renormalization issues.