Gunge continues to feature in 2010 on children's TV in the UK and continuing the trend of the latter half of the 2000s, not as much as it once did. 101 Ways to Leave a Gameshow has used it in its Bonus Round. The host picks a random name and the first person to get the question he asks wrong gets lowered down a pipe and gets gunged. Wait For It and Keep Your Enemies Close. Basilchildren's Swap Shop returned minus the gunge gallery but introducing a new game with a western theme called Gold Rush. In this game, the two winning teams from the previous game (dunk beds) take part in the game set in a mine shaft where the aim is to fill up tubes with liquid sludge by tipping buckets with the slop into the tubes which are hidden (so the children do not know who is winning). At the end the four kids take cover in the now shuddering mine shaft. The winning team then receives gold (yellow gunge) while the losing team were initially covered in brown sludge however later episodes they remain dry.
In New Zealand kids television, What Now introduced a new gungey game the big breakfast and Splat Cave. Fe Fi Fo Yum has a challenge which sees two children go barefoot into a bowl of gunge to collect objects for their teammates such as letters/numbers or other items. The final game also makes use of the gunge bowl, where the last part involves wading in the pool and up a ramp in order to release their captive teammates. In 2014, a few new games such as Use Ya Head, Target Ya Teacher and Small Balls were added to What Now. In addition, the spin-off from Horrible Histories, Horrible Histories: Gory Games involved a physical challenge involving gunge. The three children in the quiz running barefoot across an inflatable collecting "poo" and depositing it in their tanks at the other end. Above the inflatable are three containers - one for each lane of the inflatable, storing gunge which is released at points in the game. A variation of this challenge sees the three contestants again running barefoot along an inflatable lane, in an all play game, throw pies into mouths attached to a bungee cord, in the second series, this has the added difficulty of "Garum sauce" falling onto the inflatable at a random point in the game causing the children to slip and slide thus increasing the difficulty of the challenge. As of series 3 the losing kids would go down a slide barefoot into a vat of brown gunge and have to crawl through it.. The British and Australian versions of Nickelodeon's Camp Orange also features challenges which involve getting gunged. Splatalot (in Dutch Spetterslot), a medieval themed game show, similar to Total Wipeout features gunge/slime is fired at the attackers by the defenders at random points in the challenges as a means to slow down the attackers.
Sam and Mark Big Friday Wind Up has started featuring gunge since 2014. The game was called rotation and two family teams were asked general knowledge questions while a gunge tank is being poured into, if they get the question right they spin and it is the other family's turn to answer a question. The team that is under the gunge when it is full gets gunged.
In 2016, rotation was replaced by another gungey game called Splat in the box. Two family teams were asked general knowledge questions. However many seconds they took to answer the question is however many turns they do on the handle on the box. for example if they took 3 seconds to answer they will have to turn the crank 3 times. if they get a question wrong or run out of time they will have to do the maximum of turns which is 10. A gunge monster was hiding in the box and a certain number of turns will open the box and whichever team is standing in front of the box gets gunged.
7two had a new gameshow with gunge in called Flushed. The losers of the previous round went into a gunge tank and got gunged with purple gunge or "Sludge" as they call it in the show. There were 2 rounds so each episode contained 2 gungings unless there was a tie in one of the rounds so that it was just one gunging.
In terms of prime time television, in the UK at least, gunge has made appearances in the ITV1 game show The Whole 19 Yards where two transparent spheres contained either pink or yellow gunge. In one of the many physical challenges, a contestant had to unscrew the bottom of the sphere of their colour resulting in the gunge falling onto them and the floor below in order to retrieve a key in the sphere which allowed them to complete the challenge. The Channel 5 version of Big Brother (both celebrity and normal version) features gunge in various tasks and as a way to nominate housemates.
At the 2014 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Sports Awards, the Legend Award was given to soccer player David Beckham, who was slimed with gold slime rather than the traditional green. Baseball player Derek Jeter, who received the award the following year, was also slimed with a gold color.


== References ==