There are three primary attributes that characterize gunfire and hence enable the detection and location of gunfire and similar weapon discharges:
A muzzle flash that occurs when superheated gases and incompletely combusted propellant residue are secondarily ignited upon contact with fresh ambient oxygen after being expelled out the gun barrel
A muzzle blast that occurs when high-pressure gases within the barrel is suddenly released and rapidly expands when the projectile exits the muzzle and the bullet-bore contact that maintained the seal is removed. A typical muzzle blast generates a shock wave with a sound pressure level (SPL) of 140 dB or louder.
A whip-like “snap” or “crack” caused by the sonic boom that occurs as a projectile moves through the air at supersonic speeds.
Gunfire can be confused with other noises that can sound similar, such as firework explosions and cars backfiring. Gunfire noise propagation is anisotropic. The sounds may be heard at greater distances in the direction of bullet travel than behind or beside the gun.
Urban areas typically exhibit diurnal noise patterns where background noise is higher during the daytime and lower at night, where the noise floor directly correlated to urban activity (e.g., automobile traffic, airplane traffic, construction, and so on). Firearm muzzle blast may be masked by ambient noise during daytime; but may be detected at greater distances during the quieter hours of darkness. A popular urban gunfire locator system typically uses six to ten audio sensors per square mile for trilateration. (two or three per square kilometer)
A suppressor can be attached to the muzzle of a firearm to decrease the audio signature of high-velocity gases released from the muzzle when firing the weapon. The sound of firing is only decreased and is still considerable. Suppressors attached to the muzzle will not reduce the sound of high velocity gas released from other locations like the gap between the cylinder and barrel of a revolver. A muzzle suppressor is similarly ineffective in reducing the snap of a supersonic bullet, or the noise produced by the mechanical action of a self-loading firearm. Use of suppressors is rare in United States crimes. A 2007 study estimated unlawful suppressor possession was involved in only 0.05 percent (1 in 2,000) federal criminal prosecutions; and the suppressor was unused, but simply in the possession of the defendant for 92% of prosecutions involving a suppressor.