178m2Hf has the highest excitation energy of any comparably long-lived isomer. One gram of pure 178m2Hf contains approximately 1330 megajoules of energy, the equivalent in about 300 kilograms (660 pounds) of the explosive TNT. The half-life of 178m2Hf is 31 years or 1 Gs (gigasecond, 1,000,000,000 seconds) so that a gram's natural radioactivity is 1.6 TBq (terabecquerels) or roughly 40 Ci (curies). The activity is in a cascade of penetrating gamma rays, the most energetic of which is 0.574 MeV. Substantial shielding would be needed for human safety if the sample were to be 1 gram of the pure isomer. However, so far the nuclear isomer exists only at low concentrations (<0.1%), within multi-isotopic hafnium. One gram of this material has about 1.33 megajoules of energy, about an order of magnitude better than compressed hydrogen.
All energy released would be in the form of photons; X-rays and gamma rays.
If all the energy in the nucleus could be released within a short time, say 1 ns, one gram of pure 178m2Hf would produce an x-ray burst with extremely high power on the order of 1 GJ/ns or 1000 PetaWatts (see also exawatts). However, quantitative estimates indicate that the energy released by the nuclear isomer is much less than the energy needed to initiate the process; the power needed to initiate IGE would have to occur over a shorter time scale than the release of the nuclear energy, and would therefore be even more extremely disproportionate.
The characteristic scales of times for processes involved in applications would be favorable for consuming all of the initial radioactivity. The process for triggering a sample by IGE would use photons to trigger and produce photons as a product. The propagation of photons occurs at the speed of light while mechanical disassembly of the target would proceed with a velocity comparable to that of sound. Untriggered 178m2Hf material might not be able to get away from a triggered event if the photons didn't interact first with the electrons.
Both the proposal to the NATO-ARW and the fragmentary results from the subsequent experiment indicated that the energy of the photon needed to initiate IGE from 178m2Hf would be less than 300 keV. Many economical sources of such low energy X-rays were available for delivering quite large fluxes to target samples of modest dimensions.
Samples of 178m2Hf were and remain available at low concentrations <0.1%.