This section discusses conceptual approaches and tools of modern system theory and their applications. The
key concepts for the analysis and design of linear and non-linear control systems: modeling, dynamic response,
frequency response, root locus, compensation, digital control, describing functions, and phase plane are dis-
cussed in Chapter 100. Application of these concepts to a variety of systems is discussed in the following chapters.
These systems draw their name from their application, for example, vehicular systems. The topic discussed in
Chapter 101 is robotics. A robot is a computer-based mechanical manipulator which can be programmed to
perform  a  variety  of  tasks.  The  authors  review  modeling,  control,  and  application  of  robots.  Chapter  102
describes  aerospace  systems  in  avionics  and  their  use  in  communication  satellite  systems.  The  next  chapter
reviews the command, control, and communication systems used to monitor and control military aerospace
systems. Chapter 104 describes two key industrial systems: welding and bonding, and large drives. The authors
describe modeling, sensor requirements, control system requirements, and implementation for these systems.
Chapter 105 discusses man-machine systems and models used to analyze them. The next two chapters review
the  key  characteristics  and  electronic  controls  for  vehicular  systems,  and  industrial  illumination  systems.
Chapter 108 describes instruments, which are systems consisting of sensors and electronic circuits, usually for
measurement  applications.  Modern  approaches  to  navigation  on  the  land,  sea,  or  in  the  air  are  discussed  in
Chapter 109. Important topics such as reliability (Chapter 110) and environment (Chapter 111) are included
to emphasize their improtance in the design of modern products and processes. With the advent of computer
technology, system theory tools are widely available on the computer and the use of this is widespread and thus
deserves special attention. Chapter 112 discusses this software.