micro-
Microsensors are sensors that are manufactured using integrated circuit fabrication technologies and/or 
machining. 
Integrated circuits are fabricated using a series of process steps which are done in batch fashion,
meaning that thousands of circuits are processed together at the same time in the same way. The patterns which
deﬁne the components of the circuit are photolithographically transferred from a template to a semiconducting
substrate using a photosensitive organic coating. The coating pattern is then transferred into the substrate or
into a solid-state thin ﬁlm coating through an etching or deposition process. Each template, called a mask, can
contain  thousands  of  identical  sets  of  patterns,  with  each  set  representing  a  circuit.  This “batch”  method  of
manufacturing is what makes integrated circuits so reproducible and inexpensive. In addition, photoreduction
enables one to make extremely small features, on the order of microns, which is why this collection of process
steps is referred to as microfabrication. The resulting integrated circuit is contained in only the top few microns
of the semiconductor substrate and the submicron thin ﬁlms on its surface. Hence, integrated circuit technology
is said to consist of a set of planar, microfabrication processes. Micromachining refers to the set of processes
which  produce  three-dimensional  microstructures  using  the  same  photolithographic  techniques  and  batch
processing as for integrated circuits. Here, the third dimension refers to the height above the substrate of the
deposited layer or the depth into the substrate of an etched structure. Micromachining produces third dimen-
m
m (typically). The use of microfabrication to manufacture sensors produces the
sions in the range of 1–500 
same beneﬁts as it does for circuits: low cost per sensor, small size, and highly reproducible behavior. It also
enables  the  integration  of  signal  conditioning,  compensation  circuits  and  actuators,  i.e.,  entire  sensing  and
control systems, which can dramatically improve sensor performance for very little increase in cost. For these
reasons, there is a great deal of research and development activity in microsensors.