A  simulation  program  for  a  communication  system  is  a  collection  of  at  least  three  operations,  shown  in
Fig. 78.2, although in a well-integrated simulation these operations tend to merge together. The ﬁrst operation,
 deﬁnes the parameters of each subsystem and the intrinsic parameters
sometimes referred to as the 
which  is  the
that  control  the  operation  of  the  simulation.  The  second  operation  is  the 
simulation program actually executed on the computer. The third operation performed in a simulation program
This  is  a  collection  of  routines  that  format  the  simulation  output  in  a  way  which
is  that  of 
provides insight into system operations and allows the performance of the communication system under study
to be evaluated. A postprocessor usually consists of a number of graphics-based routines, allowing the user to
view waveforms and other displays generated by the simulation. The postprocessor also consists of a number of
routines that allow estimation of the bit error rate, signal-to-noise ratios, histograms, and power spectral densities.
When faced with the problem of developing a simulation of a communication system, the ﬁrst fundamental
choice is whether to develop a custom simulation using a general-purpose high-level language or to use one
of the many special-purpose communication system simulation languages available. If the decision is made to
develop a dedicated simulation using a general-purpose language, a number of resources are needed beyond a
quality compiler and a mathematics library. Also needed are libraries for ﬁltering routines, software models for
each of the subsystems contained in the overall system, channel models, and the waveform display and data
analysis routines needed for the analysis of the simulation results (postprocessing). While at least some of the
required software will have to be developed at the time the simulation is being written, many of the required
routines can probably be obtained from digital signal processing (DSP) programs and other available sources.
As more simulation projects are completed, the database of available routines becomes larger.