Soft Tissue Repair and Nerve Regeneration
No electric or magnetic system to aid nerve regeneration or soft tissue repair is approved by the FDA at the
present time for nonexperimental therapy. However, considerable animal and in vitro experimentation in this
country and abroad suggests the clinical usefulness of electric currents for soft tissue repair [Canaday and Lee,
1991] and possibly also to enhance repair of nerve ﬁbers that have sustained crush or transsection injury [Ito
and Bassett, 1983; Siskin et al., 1990]. Since there is a great variety of soft tissue pathologies that could respond
to electric or magnetic ﬁelds, the volume of application in this area could in the future become larger than in
orthopedics, provided ﬁeld-tissue and ﬁeld-cell interactions become better understood and clinical beneﬁts for
speciﬁc  injuries  and  diseases  are  established.  A  pulsed  radio  frequency  (PRF)  device  sold  in  the  U.S.  by
Electropharmacology, Inc., of Pompano Beach, FL, produces 27.12 MHz pulses of 65 microsecond duration.
Pulse repetition rates can be selected between 80 and 600 pps and peak output power is adjustable between
174  and  363  watts.  Thus,  the  highest  possible  average  power  delivered  into  the  9-in.  diameter  inductive
applicator  is  14.16  watt.  (“Inductive”  applicator  means  that  the  applicator  is  designed  to  make  the  ratio  of
electric  to  magnetic  ﬁeld  in  its  immediate  vicinity  much  less  than  the  377 W wave  impedance  of  free  space;
thus, the magnetic ﬁeld is maximized in the “near ﬁeld” region). Coupling to living tissue at 27.12 MHz without
impedance matching is rather poor [Polk, 1995]. If it is assumed that only 20% of the 14.16 W average power
is absorbed by the tissue, application for the recommened treatment period of 30 min would correspond to
an energy transfer of 1.2 kilocalories. If the mass of the local region to which this energy is applied is of the
order of 2 kg, this would correspond to a temperature increase of 0.6(cid:176)C in the absence of cooling by blood
circulation or convection. In any case, although “the PRF modality was originally reported as a non-thermal
biophysical treatment of infections” [Ginsberg, 1934; Markov and Pilla, 1995], the device is likely to produce
at least moderate tissue heating when applied with maximum output settings. The Electropharmacology “MRT
Softpulse Model 912” is marketed for clinical use in the U.S. under FDA rules which permit continued sale of