Through the use of interlaced scanning, single ﬁeld images with one-half the vertical resolution capability
of the 525-line system are provided at the high ﬂicker-perception threshold rate of 60 Hz. Higher resolution
of the full 483 lines of vertical detail is provided at the lower ﬂicker-perception threshold rate of 30 Hz. The result
is a relatively ﬂickerless picture display at a screen brightness of well over 50 to 75 ft·L, more than double that of
motion-picture ﬁlm projection. Both 60-Hz ﬁelds and 30-Hz frames have the same horizontal resolution capability.
The  second  advantage  of  interlaced  scanning,  compared  to  progressive  scanning,  where  the  frame  is  con-
structed  in  one  pass  over  the  display  face  (rather  than  in  two  through  interlace),  is  a  reduction  in  video
bandwidth for an equivalent ﬂicker threshold level. Progressive scanning of 525 lines would have to be completed
in 1/60 s to achieve an equivalent level of ﬂicker perception. This would require a line scan to be completed in
half the time of an interlaced scan. The bandwidth then would double for an equivalent number of pixels per line.
The standards adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for monochrome television in
the  United  States  speciﬁed  a  system  of  525  lines  per  frame,  transmitted  at  a  frame  rate  of  30 Hz,  with  each
frame composed of two interlaced ﬁelds of horizontal lines. Initially in the development of television trans-
mission  standards,  the  60-Hz  power  line  waveform  was  chosen  as  a  convenient  reference  for  vertical  scan.
Furthermore, in the event of coupling of power line hum into the video signal or scanning/deﬂection circuits,
the visible effects would be stationary and less objectionable than moving hum bars or distortion of horizontal-
scanning geometry. In the United Kingdom and much of Europe, a 50-Hz interlaced system was chosen for
many of the same reasons. With improvements in television receivers, the power line reference was replaced
with a stable crystal oscillator, rendering the initial reason for the frame rate a moot point.