Power Ampliﬁers
Emitter followers can be used as power ampliﬁers. Even though they have less than unity voltage gain they can
provide high current gain. Using the standard linear EF ampliﬁer for a maximum output voltage swing provides
less than 25% efﬁciency (ratio of power in to power out). The dc current carrying the ac signal is where the
  equal  to  zero,  thus  using  the
loss  of  efﬁciency  occurs.  To  avoid  this  power  loss,  the 
majority of the power for the output signal. This allows the efﬁciency to increase to as much as 70%. Full signal
ampliﬁcation requires one transistor to amplify the positive portion of the input signal and another transistor
to amplify the negative portion of the input signal. In the past, this was referred to as push-pull operation. A
better system is to use an NPN transistor for the positive part of the input signal and a PNP transistor for the
negative part. This type of operation is referred to as Class B complementary symmetry operation (Fig. 28.8).
 provides the voltage to bias the transistor at cutoff. Because these
are power transistors, the temperature will change based on the amount of power the transistor is absorbing.
 = 0. To compensate for this change
I
This means the base-emitter junction voltage will have to change to keep 
CQ
 resistors are replaced with diodes or transistors connected as diodes with the same turn-
in temperature, the 
on  characteristics  as  the  power  transistors.  This  type  of  conﬁguration  is  referred  to  as  the  complementary
symmetry diode compensated (CSDC) ampliﬁer and is shown in Fig. 28.9. To avoid crossover distortion, small
 can be raised slightly above zero to get increased
resistors can be placed in series with the diodes so that 
ampliﬁcation  in  the  cutoff  region. Another  problem  that  needs  to  be  addressed  is  the  possibility  of  thermal
runaway. This can be easily solved by placing small resistors in series with the emitters of the power transistors.
W  speaker,  the  resistors  should  not  be  greater  than  0.47 W  to  avoid  output
For  example,  if  the  load  is  an  8-
signal loss.