The  fundamental  reason  the  LPE  representation  outlined  above  is  popular  in  simulation  is  that  one  can
of linear time-invariant bandpass ﬁlters. The LPE of the output of a bandpass ﬁlter
easily generate 
is merely the convolution of the LPE of the input signal and the LPE of the impulse response of the ﬁlter. It is
far  more  difﬁcult  to  determine  a  LPE  model  for  nonlinear  and  time-varying  systems.  There  are  numerous
approaches  that  trade  off  ﬂexibility  and  simplicity.  If  the  system  is  nonlinear  and  time  invariant,  a Volterra
series can be used. While this series will exactly represent the nonlinear device, it is often analytically intractable
and  numerically  inefﬁcient.  For  nonlinear  devices  with  a  limited  amount  of  memory  the AM/AM, AM/PM
[Shimbo, 1971] LPE model is useful. This model accurately describes the response of many microwave ampliﬁers
including  traveling-wave  tubes,  solid-state  limiting  ampliﬁers,  and,  under  certain  conditions,  devices  which
exhibit hysteresis. The Chebyshev transform [Blachman, 1964] is useful for memoryless nonlinearities such as
hard and soft limiters. If the nonlinear device is so complex that none of the conventional LPE models can be
used, one may need to convert the LPE signal back to its bandpass representation, route the bandpass signal
through a model of the nonlinear device, and then reconvert the output to a LPE signal for further processing.
If  this  must  be  done,  one  has  the  choice  of  increasing  the  sampling  rate  for  the  entire  simulation  or  using
different sampling rates for various sections of the simulation. The second of these approaches is known as a
multirate simulation
 [Cochiere and Rabiner, 1983]. The interpolation and decimation operations required to
convert between sampling rates can consume signiﬁcant amounts of processor time. One must carefully examine
this trade-off to determine if a multirate simulation will substantially reduce the execution time over a single,
high sampling rate simulation. Efﬁcient and ﬂexible modeling of nonlinear devices is in general a difﬁcult task
and continues to be an area of active research.