g
i inputs are also separated
its complement, 
in time from the clock inputs as shown in Fig. 79.25(b). The gi and 
i inputs, which represent the incoming
i > gi, the S-SEED will enter a state
data and its complement, are used to set the state of the device. When 
g
where the upper MQW pin diode will be reﬂective, forcing the lower diode to be absorptive. When gi > 
i the
opposite condition will occur. Low switching intensities are able to change the device’s state when the clock
signals are not present. After the device has been put into its proper state, the clock beams are applied to both
inputs. The ratio of the power between the two clock beams should be approximately one, which will prevent
the device from changing states. These higher energy clock pulses, on reﬂection, will transmit the state of the device
to the next stage of the system. Since the inputs gi and 
i are low-intensity pulses and the clock signals are high-
intensity pulses, a large differential gain may be achieved. This type of gain is referred to as time-sequential gain.
The operation of an S-SEED is determined by the power transfer characteristic shown in Fig. 79.26(c). The
optical power reﬂected by the yi window, when the clock signal is applied, is plotted against the ratio of the
total optical signal power impinging on the gi and 
i windows (when the clock signal is not applied). Assuming
the clock power incident on both signal windows, gi and 
i, the output power is proportional to the reﬂectivity,
Ri. The ratio of the input signal powers is deﬁned as the input contrast ratio Cin = Pg/P i. As Cin is increased
from zero, the reﬂectivity of the yi window switches from a low value, R1, to a high value, R2, at a Cin value
approximately  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  absorbances  of  the  two  optical  windows:  T  =  (1  –  R1)/(1  –  R2).
Simultaneously, the reﬂectivity of the other window (yi) switches from R2 to R1. The return transition point
(ideally)  occurs  when  Cin  =  (1  –  R2)/(1  –  R1)  =  l/T.  The  ratio  of  the  two  reﬂectivities,  R2/R1,  is  the  output
contrast, Cout. Typical measured values of the preceding parameters include Cout = 3.2, T = 1.4, R2 = 50% and
R1 = 15%. The switching energy for these devices has been measured at ~7 fJ/mm2.