PHIGS and PHIGS+, the Programmer’s Hierarchical Interactive Graphics System. Both systems support graph-
ics primitives, such as lines, polygons, and character strings, and their attributes. The GKS system allows for
groupings into segments with no nesting capabilities. PHIGS supports geometrical transformations (i.e., scaling,
translating,  and  rotating)  and  a  database  structure  that  allows  for  selective  editing  and  manipulation  of  the
rendering
picture.  PHIGS  runs  best  when  there  is  hardware  support  for  the  transformation,  clipping,  and 
features.  Other  software  include  the  cross-platform  OpenGL,  which  is  a  low-level  graphics  rendering  and
imaging library, and Inventor, which is object-oriented and built on top of Open GL [Reynolds and Danielson, 1996].
In  traditional  graphical  systems  development,  image  data  are  stored  either  as  Cartesian  coordinates  or  as
vectors.  These  data  are  manipulated  through  the  geometrical  transformations  of  scaling,  translating,  and
(WCS). The units of the WCS system might
rotating in a reference system known as the 
screen coordinate
be inches, millimeters, or miles. Physical devices use their own coordinate systems known as 
 takes place, which changes the
systems 
 or portion of
window
image data in the WCS to its corresponding device-speciﬁc screen coordinates in SCS. A 
. Because some of the
viewport
the world picture is chosen to be shown in an area of the display known as the 
operation is necessary. Clipping will eliminate any
data in the world could be outside the window, a 
data points outside the window. These values are then converted to an intermediate coordinate system known
 (NDC). Values in this system are in the range of 0 to 1. Because a
as the 
viewport may be any portion of the display area and the image could be displayed on more than one device,
the  NDC  values  are  easily  adjusted  to  screen  coordinates.  In  3-D,  the  clipping  volume  uses  the  viewing
 (i.e., the position from which an object
transformation which must take into account the 
 (i.e., the conversion from the object’s 3-D coordinates
is to be viewed) and the 
to the screen’s 2-D coordinates).