Compliant Motion
The position control methods described above are not sufﬁcient when the robot has to react continuously to
contact forces at the end effector. Consider, for example, a simple operation of sliding a block of wood on a
table along a desired path. Pure position control will not work because any small errors orthogonal to the table
may result in the block either losing contact with the surface of the table or forcing the block through the table,
which can either damage the table or the end effector. To perform this task, we need to control the position in
the  plane  of  the  table  and  control  force  normal  to  the  table.  This  is  called  compliant  motion  control  and  is
required whenever the robot is in contact with its “environment.” To perform the above task, for example, a
coordinate system called a compliance frame or constraint frame is deﬁned such that at each instant and along
each  axis  the  task  can  be  expressed  as  a  pure  position  control  or  pure  force  control.  Suppose  we  associate  a
coordinate system with the z-axis normal to the table surface. Then to perform this task, we need to control
the position along the x and y directions and force control in the z direction to maintain continuous contact
with  the  table  surface.  In  this  case,  the  position  along  the  z direction  is  not  controlled  because  one  cannot
control both position and force in the same direction, just as we cannot control both voltage and current across
a resistor. Hence, this framework will provide a natural separation between the axes that need to be position
controlled  and  the  axes  that  need  to  be  force-controlled.  This  is  the  idea  behind  the  hybrid  position/force
control developed by Raibert and Craig [1981]. Another approach for complaint motion control is the imped-
ance control [Hogan, 1985]. Impedance control does not control the end-point position or force directly, rather
a desired dynamic relationship between position and force (mechanical impedance). For a good comparison
between these two approaches, the reader is referred to Asada and Slotine [1986].