Physiology
The  heart  has  four  chambers;  the  upper  two  chambers  are  called  the  atria  and  the  lower  two  chambers  are
called the ventricles. The atria are thin-walled, low-pressure pumps which receive blood from venous circulation.
Located in the top right atrium are a group of cells which act as the primary pacemaker of the heart. Through
a  complex  change  of  ionic  concentration  across  the  cell  membranes  (the  current  source)  an  extracellular
potential  ﬁeld  is  established  which  then  excites  neighboring  cells  and  a  cell-to-cell  propagation  of  electrical
events  occurs.  Because  the  body  acts  as  a  purely  resistive  medium,  these  potential  ﬁelds  extend  to  the  body
surface  [Geselowitz,  1989].  The  character  of  the  body  surface  waves  depends  upon  the  amount  of  tissue
activating at one time and the relative speed and direction of the activation wavefront. Therefore the pacemaker
potentials  which  are  generated  by  a  small  tissue  mass  are  not  seen  on  the  ECG. As  the  activation  wavefront
encounters  the  increased  mass  of  atrial  muscle,  the  initiation  of  electrical  activity  is  observed  on  the  body
surface and the ﬁrst ECG wave of the cardiac cycle is seen. This is the P wave and it represents activation of
the  atria.  Conduction  of  the  cardiac  impulse  proceeds  from  the  atria  through  a  series  of  specialized  cardiac
cells (the A-V node and the His-Purkinje system) which again are too small in total mass to generate a signal
large enough to be seen on the standard ECG. There is a short relatively isoelectric segment following the P
wave. Once the large muscle mass of the ventricles is excited, a rapid and large deﬂection is seen on the body
surface.  The  excitation  of  the  ventricles  causes  them  to  contract  and  provides  the  main  force  for  circulating
blood to the organs of the body. This large wave appears to have several components. The initial downward
deﬂection is called the Q wave, the initial upward deﬂection is the R wave, and the terminal downward deﬂection
is the S wave. The polarity and actual presence of these three components depends upon the position of the
leads  on  the  body  as  well  as  a  multitude  of  abnormalities  that  may  exist.  In  general,  the  large  ventricular
waveform is generically called the QRS complex regardless of its makeup. Following the QRS complex is another
short relatively isoelectric segment. After this short segment the ventricles return to their electrical resting state
and a wave of repolarization is seen as a low-frequency signal called the T wave. In some individuals a small
peak occurs at the end or after the T wave and is called the U wave. Its origin has never been fully established
but is believed to be a repolarization potential.