It  is  known  that  electrokinetic  or  streaming  potentials  rather  than  piezoelectricity  make  the  principal
contribution to electric potentials generated by mechanically stressed bone [Gross and Williams, 1982; Lavine
and Grodzinsky, 1987]. Thus potential differences appear when mechanical loading displaces ﬂuid that contains
“counterions” which normally reside opposite ions ﬁxed to cell or intercellular matrix surfaces. These potentials
are likely to play a role in intercellular signaling and in bone as well as cartilage and soft tissue development.
While the original intent of electrical bone therapy was to simply mimic endogenously generated ﬁelds, a much
wider range of signals was found to be clinically useful. Furthermore it was found later that some weak ionic
currents (»5 · 10–2 A/m2) [Levine and Grodzinsky, 1987] appear endogenously without mechanical stress and
that extremely weak sinusoidal electric ﬁelds can produce profound effects on cells in vitro. For example, both
cell number and phosphotase activity in monolayers of osteoblasts (bone forming cells) was signiﬁcantly affected
by  a  magnetically  induced  (1.8  mT)  30  Hz  electrical  ﬁeld  estimated  to  be  0.6  mV/m  [McLeod  et al.,  1993].
Sinusoidally alternating ﬁelds between 50 and 300 Hz, as small as 0.6 mV/m, were shown to affect ATP splitting
activity of the membrane enzyme Na, K-ATPase [Blank and Soo, 1992]. A 60-Hz magnetic ﬁeld of 1.2 NT was
reported to inhibit the oncostatic action of the hormone melatonin on estrogen positive human breast cancer
cells (“MCF-7”) in vitro [Liburdy et al.]. Calcium metabolism was affected signiﬁcantly in mitogen-activated
lymphocytes by a 4-mT, 16-Hz magnetic ﬁeld (in the presence of a 23.4-mT dc magnetic ﬁeld) that induced an
average electric ﬁeld of about (2) 10–5 V/m [Yost and Liburdy, 1992]. Sinusoidal 15-Hz magnetic ﬁelds at the
0.5-mT level, giving an estimated mean electric ﬁeld in the affected tissue of less than 10–3 V/m, signiﬁcantly
affected cartilage development in immature rats [Ciombor et al., 1991].