To illustrate the output that is typically generated by a communication system simulation, a simple example is
considered.  The  system  is  that  considered  in  Fig. 78.10.  An  OQPSK  (offset  quadrature  phase-shift  keyed)
modulation format is assumed so that one of four waveforms is transmitted during each symbol period. The
data source may be viewed as a single binary source, in which the source symbols are taken two at a time when
mapped  onto  a  transmitted  waveform,  or  as  two  parallel  data  sources,  with  one  source  providing  the  direct
channel modulation and the second source providing the quadrature channel modulation. The signal constel-
lation at the modulator output appears as shown in Fig. 78.11(a), with the corresponding eye diagram appearing
as shown in Fig. 78.11(b). The eye diagram is formed by overlaying successive time intervals of a time domain
waveform  onto  a  single  graph,  much  as  would  be  done  with  a  common  oscilloscope.  Since  the  simulation
sampling frequency used in generating Fig. 78.11(b) was 10 samples per data symbol, it is easily seen that the
eye diagram was generated by retracing every 2 data symbols or 20 simulation samples. Since Fig. 78.11(a) and
(b) correspond to the modulator output, which has not yet been ﬁltered, the transitions between binary states
occur in one simulation step. After ﬁltering, the eye diagram appears as shown in Fig. 78.11(c). A seventh-order
Butterworth  bilinear  z-transform  digital  ﬁlter  was  assumed  with  a  3-dB  bandwidth  equal  to  the  bit  rate.  It
should  be  noted  that  the  bit  transitions  shown  in  Fig. 78.11(c)  do  not  occur  at  the  same  times  as  the  bit
transitions shown in Fig. 78.11(b). The difference is due to the group delay of the ﬁlter. Note in Fig. 78.10 that
the transmitter also involves a nonlinear ampliﬁer. We will see the effects of this component later in this section.
Another  interesting  point  in  the  system  is  within  the  receiver.  Since  the  communication  system  is  being
modeled as a baseband system due to the use of the complex-envelope representation of the bandpass waveforms
generated in the simulation, the data detector is represented as an integrate-and-dump detector. The detector
is then modeled as a sliding-average integrator, in which the width of the integration window is one bit time.
The integration is therefore over a single bit period when the sliding window is synchronized with a bit period.
The direct-channel and quadrature-channel waveforms at the output of the sliding-average integrator are shown
in Fig. 78.12(a). The corresponding eye diagrams are shown in Fig. 78.12(b). In order to minimize the error
probability of the system, the bit decision must be based on the integrator output at the time for which the
eye opening is greatest. Thus the eye diagram provides important information concerning the sensitivity of the
system to timing errors.