All insulating materials will undergo varying degrees of aging or deteriorating under normal operating condi-
tions.  The  rate  of  aging  will  be  contingent  upon  the  magnitude  of  the  electrical,  thermal,  and  mechanical
stresses to which the material is subjected; it will also be inﬂuenced by the composition and molecular structure
of  the  material  itself  as  well  as  the  chemical,  physical,  and  radiation  environment  under  which  the  material
must perform. The useful life of an insulating system will thus be determined by a given set and subset of aging
variables. For example, the subset of variables in the voltage stress variable are the average and maximum values
of the applied voltage, its frequency, and the recurrence rate of superposed impulse or transient voltage surges.
For the thermal stress, the upper and lower ambient temperatures, the temperature gradient in the insulation,
and the maximum permissible operating temperature constitute the subvariable set. Also, the character of the
mechanical  stress  will  differ,  depending  upon  whether  torsion,  compression,  or  tension  and  bending  are
involved. Furthermore, the aging rate will be differently affected if all stresses (electrical, thermal, and mechan-
ical)  act  simultaneously,  separately,  or  in  some  predetermined  sequence.  The  inﬂuence  exerted  on  the  aging
rate by the environment will depend on whether the insulation system will be subjected to corrosive chemicals,
petroleum  ﬂuids,  water  or  high  humidity,  air  or  oxygen,  ultraviolet  radiation  from  the  sun,  and  nuclear
radiation. Organic insulations, in particular, may experience chemical degradation in the presence of oxygen.
For example, polyethylene under temperature cycle will undergo both physical and chemical changes. These
effects will be particularly acute at the emergency operating temperatures (90–130(cid:176)C); at these temperatures
partial or complete melting of the polymer will occur and the increased diffusion rate will permit the oxygen
to migrate to a greater depth into the polymer. Ultimately the antioxidant will be consumed, resulting in an
embrittlement  of  polymer  and  in  extreme  cases  in  the  formation  of  macroscopic  cracks.  Subjection  of  the
polymer  to  many  repeated  overload  cycles  will  be  accompanied  by  repeated  melting  and  recrystallization  of
the polymer—a process that will inevitably cause the formation of cavities, which, when subjected to sufﬁciently
high voltages, will undergo discharge, leading eventually to electrical breakdown.