The  four  basic  components  display  overlapped  regions  to  indicate  their  inseparability.  A  portion  of  each
category  can  be  designed  in  isolation;  a  new  antenna  or  a  new  radio  with  decreased  size,  weight,  or  power
consumption  has  minimal  impact  on  the  other  components.  However,  insertion  of  a  broad  new  technology
(e.g.,  a  radio  relay  combined  with  a  remotely  piloted  vehicle  (RPV)  or  the  networking  of  radios)  has  wide
reaching consequences and it may take years to fully integrate into doctrine, training, and organization. The
conjunction of the four areas, when speciﬁed with some detail, represents or contains an architecture. If the
assets, the doctrine, and so on are limited to just one military function, then the aggregation is referred to as
a  mission  architecture.  Figure 103.2  depicts  two  approaches  to  achieving  C3  architectures.  The  ﬁrst
[Fig. 103.2(a)] is essentially an aggregation and combination of existing assets and is referred to as a “bottom-
up” architecture. The “top-down” version of architecture development [Fig. 103.2(b)] begins with earlier and
high order perspective (and higher order oversight). Interfaces and interface standards become more important
in  top-down  architectures;  instead  of  numerous  custom  and  unique  interfaces,  a  minimal  set  of  interface
standards  is  desired. When  new  or  updated  equipment  is  designed  or  acquired  it  can  be  integrated  without
 A  developing  architecture  of
new  interface  developments,  a  key  property  of  an 
this type is entitled, at the Joint Chiefs of Staff level, “C4I for the Warrior.” Service-speciﬁc top-down architec-
tures are Copernicus (Navy), AirLand 2000 (Army), MTACCS (Marine Corps Tactical Command and Control
System) and a yet unnamed Air Force architecture. Each of these are to be considered as evolving architectures
and all reﬂect the impact and importance of scenarios with highly mobile nodes. The open system or top-down
approach promotes interoperability between the developments of each service.