Most elements of transmitters, channels, and receivers are implemented using standard DSP techniques. Effects
that are difﬁcult to characterize using mathematical analysis can often be included in the simulation with little
additional  effort.  Common  examples  include  gain  and  phase  imbalance  in  quadrature  circuits,  nonlinear
ampliﬁers,  oscillator  instabilities,  and  antenna  platform  motion.  One  can  typically  use  LPE  waveforms  and
devices  to  avoid  translating  the  modulator  output  to  the  carrier  frequency.  Signal  levels  in  physical  systems
often  vary  by  many  orders  of  magnitude,  with  the  output  of  the  transmitters  being  extremely  high  energy
signals  and  the  input  to  receivers  at  very  low  energies.  To  reduce  execution  time  and  avoid  working  with
extremely large and small signal level simulations, one often omits the effects of linear ampliﬁers and attenuators
and uses normalized signals. Since the performance of most systems is a function of the signal-to-noise ratio,
and not of absolute signal level, normalization will have no effect on the measured performance. One must be
careful to document the normalizing constants so that the original signal levels can be reconstructed if needed.
Even  some  rather  complex  functions,  such  as  error  detecting  and  correcting  codes,  can  be  handled  in  this
manner. If one knows the uncoded error rate for a system, the coded error rate can often be closely approximated
by applying a mathematical mapping. As will be pointed out below, the amount of processor time required to
produce a meaningful error rate estimate is often inversely proportional to the error rate. While an uncoded
error rate may be easy to measure, the coded error rate is usually so small that it would be impractical to execute
a  simulation  to  measure  this  quantity  directly.  The  performance  of  a  coded  communication  system  is  most
often  determined  by  ﬁrst  executing  a  simulation  to  establish  the  channel  symbol  error  rate.  An  analytical
mapping can then be used to determine the decoded BER from the channel symbol error rate.