Managing “Unused“ Inputs of Components. When designing digital systems from existing components there
may be inputs of those components that, for the current implementation, are not needed. For example, if a
two-input AND gate is needed to implement a logic circuit on a printed circuit board, it may be possible to
use one of the unused three-input AND gate elements from an IC package already present on that board. In
this case, the unused third input of that AND gate must be connected to the logic 1 level in order that a three-
input AND function may be implemented using the other two inputs to that gate. Thus, the unused input to
the AND gate may be connected directly to the Vcc  (i.e, power supply) signal. Similarly, if a ﬂip-ﬂop contains
unused preset or clear terminals, these may be tied off to their respective deasserted states. In many cases printed
circuit boards are tested using an in-circuit tester which uses a bed-of-nails test ﬁxture to make physical contact
with  selected  nets  on  the  board  so  that  their  values  can  be  observed  or  controlled  by  the  tester.  For  the  in-
circuit  tester  to  control  the  value  of  a  net  it  has  to  backdrive  the  output  of  the  component  which  normally
drives that net. Since IC components have limited output drive capabilities, the in-circuit tester can overcome
the electrical drive from that component and can force that net to a value opposite the value which the driving
IC is trying to achieve. By keeping such backdriving conditions to last only a very short period, damage to the
opposing IC component is prevented. However, if the net is driven not by an IC but directly from the Vcc  or
ground (Gnd) signals, then the in-circuit tester may not be able to overcome their drive. Furthermore, back-
driving the Vcc  or Gnd levels would prevent the other IC components from being able to perform their normal
functions. Instead, if the logic signals to such unused terminals are applied using pull-up or pull-down resistors
when connecting these to the Vcc  or Gnd levels, respectively, these signals may be controlled by the in-circuit
tester. For example, this way it becomes possible to set/reset a ﬂip-ﬂop value by using the normally “unused”
preset/clear terminal of that ﬂip-ﬂop. Note that if the ﬂip-ﬂop contains both a preset and a clear input which
are unused, these must be pulled up (or pulled down) through separate resistors so that each can be controlled
by the in-circuit tester independent of the other. This is illustrated in Fig. 85.10.