As a result of the Faraday rotation effect and Cotton-Mouton effect, the magnetization associated with MSWs
will induce a perturbation in the dielectric tensor. When MSW propagates in the YIG ﬁlm, it induces a moving
optical grating which facilitates the diffraction of an incident guided light beam. If the so-called Bragg condition
is  satisﬁed  between  the  incident  guided  light  and  the  MSW-induced  optical  grating,  Bragg  diffraction  takes
place. An optical device built based on this principle is called the magnetooptic Bragg cell [Tsai and Young, 1990].
A typical MSFVW-based noncollinear coplanar guided-wave magnetooptic Bragg cell is schematically shown
in Fig. 57.4. Here a homogeneous dc bias magnetic ﬁeld is applied along the Z axis to excite a Y-propagating
MSFVW generated by a microstrip line transducer. With a guided lightwave coupled into the YIG waveguide
and propagating along the X axis, a portion of the lightwave is Bragg-diffracted and mode-converted (TE to
TM mode and vice versa). The Bragg-diffracted light is scanned in the waveguide plane as the frequency of the
MSFVW is tuned. Figure 57.5 shows the scanned light spots by tuning the frequency at a constant dc magnetic ﬁeld.
MSW-based guided-wave magnetooptic Bragg cell is analogous to surface acoustic wave (SAW)-based guided-
wave acoustooptic (AO) Bragg cell and has the potential to signiﬁcantly enhance a wide variety of integrated
optical applications which had previously been implemented with SAW. These include TE-TM mode converter,
spectrum  analyzer,  convolvers/correlators,  optical  frequency  shifters,  tunable  narrowband  optical  ﬁlters,  and
optical  beam  scanners/switches  [Young,  1989].  In  comparison  to  their  AO  counterparts,  the  MSW-based
magnetooptic  Bragg  cell  modules  may  possess  the  following  unique  advantages:  (1) A  much  larger  range  of
tunable carrier frequencies (2–20 GHz, for example) may be readily obtained by varying a dc magnetic ﬁeld.
Such high and tunable carrier frequencies with the magnetooptic device modules allow direct processing at the
carrier frequency of wide-band RF signals rather than indirect processing via frequency down-conversion, as
is required with the AO device modules. (2) A large magnetooptic bandwidth may be realized by means of a
simpler transducer geometry. (3) Much higher and electronically tunable modulation/switching and scanning
speeds are possible as the velocity of propagation for the MSW is higher than that of SAW by one to two orders
of magnitude, depending upon the dc magnetic ﬁeld and the carrier frequency.