maximum order of the (L/DL) dependency but at the cost, however, of requiring the computation to be repeated
for  each  RHS.  We  also  emphasize  that  these  comparisons  consider  only  problems  involving  homogeneous
objects, thereby providing a more favorable situation for IE models because their sampling dimensionality d
= D – 1 for a problem dimensionality of D but which increases to d = D when an inhomogeneous object is
modeled. Because of these and other factors that can lead to many different combinations of formulation and
numerical treatment, the foregoing results should be viewed as only generic guidelines, with the computational
characteristics of each speciﬁc model requiring individual analysis to obtain numerical values for the various
Ax coefﬁcients and their (L/DL) dependency. It is relevant to observe that the lowest-order size dependency for
three-dimensional problems is exhibited by the DE explicit time-domain model which is on the order of (L/DL)4.
An additional factor that should be considered when choosing among computer models is the information
needed for a particular application relative to the information provided by the model. A time-domain model,
for example, can intrinsically provide a frequency response over a band of frequencies from a single calculation,
whereas a frequency-domain model requires repeated evaluation at each of the frequencies required to deﬁne
the wideband response. Iterative solution of the direct matrix may be preferable for problems involving only
2  admittances of
one, or a few, excitations such as is the case for antenna modeling, to avoid computing all Nx
the solution matrix when only a single column of that matrix is needed. A DE-based model necessarily provides
the “near” ﬁelds throughout the region being modeled, while an IE-based model requires additional compu-
tations essentially the same as those done in ﬁlling the impedance matrix once the sources have been obtained
to evaluate the near ﬁelds. For applications that require modest computer time and storage, these considerations
may be relatively less important than those that strain available computer resources. Clearly, the overall objective
from an applications viewpoint is to obtain the needed information at the required level of accuracy for the
minimum overall cost.