Coaxial Detectors
The  detector  type  shown  in  Fig. 116.8  and  in  Fig. 116.9(e)  has  a  closed-end  coaxial  geometry.  Nearly  all  the
largest volume (active volumes of 100 cm3 to 800 cm3) HPGe detectors are of this type. This electrode geometry
reduces both capacitance and depletion voltage with respect to a planar detector of the same volume. This latter
beneﬁt relaxes the constraint on material purity. In addition, charge collection distances are shortened, and the
uncontacted  surface  area,  frequently  troublesome  in  processing,  is  reduced. Also,  the  HPGe  is  grown  by  the
Czochralski technique, and is therefore nearly cylindrical even before machining. It is important, however, to
note  that  the  reduction  in  depletion  voltage  is  realized  only  when  the  device  is  contacted  so  that  it  depletes
from  the  outer  contact  to  the  inner  contact.  Thus,  p-type  HPGe  to  be  fabricated  into  a  coaxial  detector  is
lithium diffused on the outer diameter; and in the case of n-type HPGe, the outer diameter is boron implanted.
The boron-implanted contact (depth approximately 0.2 µ) is thinner than the lithium-diffused contact (depth
approximately 750 µ), so the n-type coaxial detector can detect lower-energy radiation and is usually built with
a beryllium window in the aluminum end-cap to take full advantage of this feature. The difference in the range
of use is illustrated in Fig. 116.10. The geometric asymmetry of the contacting electrodes in the coaxial detector
makes charge collection more dependent on the carriers (electrons or holes) traversing to the inner contact.
As  more  gamma-rays  are  absorbed  near  the  outer  contact,  the  carriers  traversing  to  the  inner  contact  must
travel  on  average  a  longer  distance.  Also,  charge  traversal  near  the  inner  contact  is  particularly  effective  in
inducing current in the external circuit [13]. Thus, the p-type coaxial detector with positive bias on the outer
electrode is more sensitive to hole collection, and the n-type coaxial detector with negative bias on the outer
electrode  is  more  sensitive  to  electron  collection.  This  is  a  crucial  consideration  in  applications  where  hole
collection is going to be degraded during use by exposure to fast neutrons or other damaging radiation. The