Field-Programmable Gate Arrays: Evolving to an ASIC Technology
The ﬁeld-programmable gate array (FPGA), like the gate array, places ﬁxed cells on the wafer, and the FPGA
designer constructs more-complex functions from these cells. However, the cells provided on the FPGA can be
substantially  more  complex  than  the  simple  gates  provided  on  the  gate  array.  In  addition,  the  term  ﬁeld
programmable highlights the customizing of the ASIC by the user, rather than by the foundry manufacturing
the FPGA. The mask-programmable gate array (MPGA) is similar to the FPGA (using more-complex cells than
the gate array), but the programming is performed by addition of the metal layer by the FPGA manufacturer.
Figure 25.33  shows  an  example  of  cells  and  programmable  interconnections  for  a  representative  FPGA
technology  [Actel,  1995].  The  array  of  cells  is  constructed  from  two  types  of  cell,  which  alternate  along  the
logic cell rows of the FPGA. The combinational logic cell — “C-module” in Fig. 25.33(a) — provides a ROM-
based lookup table (LUT) able to efﬁciently implement a complex logic function (with four data inputs and
two  control  signals).  The  sequential  cell  (S-module)  adds  a  ﬂip-ﬂop  to  the  combinational  module,  allowing
efﬁcient realization of sequential circuits. The interconnection approach illustrated in Fig. 25.33(c) is based on
(1)  short  vertical  interconnections  directly  connecting  adjacent  modules,  (2)  long  vertical  interconnections
extending  through  the  overall  array,  (3)  long  horizontal  interconnections  extending  across  the  overall  array,
(4) points at which the long vertical interconnections can be connected to cells, and (5) points at which the
long vertical and horizontal lines can be used for general routing. The long horizontal and vertical lines are
broken  into  segments,  with  programmable  links  between  successive  segments.  The  programmer  can  then
connect a set of adjacent line segments to create the desired interconnection line. In addition, programmable
connection  points  allow  the  programmer  to  make  transitions  between  the  long  vertical  lines  and  the  long
horizontal  lines.  By  connecting  various  inputs  the  cell  of  an  FPGA  to  either  Vdd  or  GND,  the  cell  can  be
“programmed” to perform one of its possible functions. The basic array is complemented by additional driver
and other circuitry around the perimeter of the FPGA for interfacing to the “external world.”