Resistive. Resistive overlay technology requires a more complex assembly consisting of two layers, as illustrated
in Fig. 89.13. The layers both contain transparent metallic surfaces and are separated by spacers so that an air
gap exists between the layers in the absence of any pressure on the touch panel. The metallic layers face each
other and when the outer panel is pressed the metallic layers make contact and form a conductive path at the
point  of  contact. When  a  voltage  is  applied  between  the  top  of  the  outer  layer  and  the  bottom  of  the  inner
layer, the two layers act as a voltage divider, and the voltage at the point of contact may be measured in the X
and Y directions by applying the voltage in ﬁrst one and then the other direction. The measured voltages are
then transmitted to the controller where they are converted into coordinates which are then sent to the computer.
The panel may be discrete, in which the conductive coating on the top layer is etched in one direction and
that  on  the  bottom  layer  in  the  other  direction,  or  analog,  where  the  conductive  coatings  in  both  layers  are
continuous. In the discrete case, the panel then acts as an X–Y matrix, and the resolution is determined by the
number of etched lines. The analog conﬁguration requires the addition of linearization networks on each edge
of  the  panel  so  that  a  large-area  resistor  is  created  with  a  voltage  drop  in  one  direction.  Other  linearization
techniques are also possible, but only the four-element system is described here as shown in Fig. 89.14. In this
arrangement, one of the layers acts as the large-area resistor and the other as a voltage probe where either can
function in either role. For the Y coordinate value the top layer is the voltage probe, and the voltage is applied
by the controller to the bottom layer. Similarly, the X coordinate is found by connecting the voltage to the top
layer and making the bottom layer into the voltage probe. In either type of system, the resolution can be very
high, but the transmissivity is reduced to under 80% due to the multiple layers.