High-resolution  capability  is  now  a  standard  feature  on  most  digitally  based  ECG  systems  or  as  a  stand-
alone microprocessor-based unit [Berbari, 1988]. The most common application of the HRECG is to record
very low-level (»1.0 mV) signals which occur after the QRS complex but are not evident on the standard ECG.
These “late potentials” are generated from abnormal regions of the ventricles and have been strongly associated
with  the  substrate  responsible  for  a  life-threatening  rapid  heart  rate  (ventricular  tachycardia).  The  typical
HRECG  is  derived  from  three  bipolar  leads  conﬁgured  in  an  anatomic  XYZ  coordinate  system.  These  three
ECG signals are then digitized at a rate of 1000–2000 Hz/channel, time aligned via a real-time QRS correlator,
and summated in the form of a signal average. Signal averaging will theoretically improve the signal-to-noise
ratio by the square root of the number of beats averaged. The underlying assumptions are that the signals of
interest  do  not  vary,  on  a  beat-to-beat  basis,  and  that  the  noise  is  random.  Figure  115.10  has  four  panels
depicting the most common sequence for processing the HRECG to measure the late potentials. Panel A depicts
a three-second recording of the XYZ leads close to normal resolution. Panel B was obtained after averaging 200
beats  and  with  a  sampling  frequency  of  10  times  that  shown  in  panel A.  The  gain  is  also  ﬁve  times  greater.
Panel  C  is  the  high-pass  ﬁltered  signal  using  a  partially  time  reversed  digital  ﬁlter  having  a  second-order
Butterworth response and a 3-dB corner frequency of 40 Hz [Simson, 1981]. Note the appearance of the signals
at  the  terminal  portion  of  the  QRS  complex.  A  common  method  of  analysis,  but  necessarily  optimal,  is  to
combine the ﬁltered XYZ leads into a vector magnitude (X2 + Y2 + Z2)1/2. This waveform is shown in panel D.
From this waveform several parameters have been derived such as total QRS duration, including late potentials,
the rms voltage value of the terminal 40 ms, and the low-amplitude signal (LAS) duration from the 40-mV level
to the end of the late potentials. Abnormal values for these parameters are used to identify patients at high risk
of ventricular tachycardia following a heart attack.