Directional Comparison Blocking Scheme
Consider the fault at F2 shown in Fig. 61.47. As discussed above, this fault will be cleared in zone 1 time by the
step-distance relay at bus B, while the relay at bus A will clear the fault in zone 2 time. Since the relays at bus B
can determine, with a high degree of certainty, that a fault such as F2 is indeed inside the zone of protection
of  the  relays,  one  could  communicate  this  knowledge  to  terminal A,  which  can  then  cause  the  local  circuit
breaker  to  trip  for  the  fault F2.  If  the  entire  relaying  and  communication  task  can  be  accomplished  quickly,
100% of the line can be protected at high speed. One of the most commonly used methods of achieving this
function is to use overreaching zones of protection at both terminals, and if a fault is detected to be inside this
zone, and if the remote terminal conﬁrms that the fault is inside the zone of protection, then the local relay
may be allowed to trip. In actual practice, the complement of this information is used to block the trip at the
remote end. Thus, the remote end, terminal B in this case, detects faults that are outside the zone of protection
and, for those faults, sends a signal which asks the relay at terminal A to block the tripping command. Thus,
for a fault such as F3, the relay at A will trip, unless the communication is received from terminal B that this
particular fault is outside the zone of protection—as indeed fault F3 happens to be. This mode, known as a
blocking carrier, is preferred, since a loss of the carrier signal created by an internal fault, or due to causes that
are unrelated to the fault, will not prevent the trip at the remote end. This is a highly dependable protection
system,  and  precisely  because  of  that  it  is  somewhat  less  secure.  Nevertheless,  as  discussed  previously,  most
power  systems  require  that  a  fault  be  removed  as  quickly  as  possible,  even  if  in  doing  so  for  a  few  faults  an
unwarranted trip may result.