connected to scannable ﬂip-ﬂops (i.e., pseudo-inputs) or to primary input pins of the component such that
all inputs are 100% controllable either by controlling the values in the ﬂip-ﬂops or the primary input pins. All
ﬂip-ﬂops are assumed to be scannable and are arranged into a single scan path such that the logic cones have
n or fewer inputs all of which lie within k consecutive bits along the scan path. Outputs from the individual
logic cones connect (not shown here) to the inputs of ﬂip-ﬂops and/or primary output pins. Thus, all logic
cone outputs are also 100% observable. Now, assume that the serial output from the LFSR shown in Fig. 85.20
is connected as the “scan-in” input to the scan-path register shown in Fig. 85.21. In this case any consecutive
3-bit partition of the scan-path register will go through the same state sequence as the LFSR itself, delayed from
it by the number of ﬂip-ﬂops between that partition and the output bit of the LFSR. For example, the third
logic cone that has inputs from ﬂip-ﬂops 4, 5, and 6 will see all input permutations except the all-zeros case
which can be applied separately as a special case. On the other hand, the ﬁrst logic cone, with inputs from ﬂip-
ﬂops 1, 2, and 4, will not receive all possible nonzero permutations of three input variables. This is because
the ﬁrst logic cone receives its three inputs from three nonconsecutive positions of the scan-path register. In this
case only input permutations that have even parity across positions 1, 2, and 4 will be received by the ﬁrst logic
cone.  Furthermore,  the  fourth  logic  cone  that  also  receives  inputs  from  three  nonconsecutive  bit  positions
which  are  4  bits  apart  will  receive  all  3-bit  nonzero  input  permutations.  Analysis  of  which  set  of  input
permutations may be generated across nonconsecutive n bits of a scan-path register which receives the outputs
from an mth degree (m ‡ n) LFSR is based on linear dependence and is outside the scope of this section. However,
the problem may also be approached statistically by choosing the degree of the LFSR to be higher than n but
smaller than k which is the largest span of inputs to any logic cone. For example, in Fig. 85.21 the degree of
the LFSR may be chosen as 4. In this case, the probability that a logic cone which has 4 or fewer inputs separated
by k bits (here, k = 5) may be calculated [Lempel and Cohn, 1985]. It should be noted that a logic cone may
be tested in full even when it has not received all 2**n input permutations.