Some approximate limits on the possible switching times of a given device, whether optical or electrical, are
illustrated in Fig. 79.30. In this ﬁgure the time required to switch the state of a device is on the abscissa while
the power/bit required to switch the state of a device is on the ordinate. The region of spontaneous switching
is the result of the background thermal energy that is present in a device. If the switching energy for the device
is  too  low,  the  background  thermal  energy  will  cause  the  device  to  change  states  spontaneously.  To  prevent
these random transitions in the state of a device, the switching energy required by the device must be much
larger than the background thermal energy. To be able to differentiate statistically between two states, this ﬁgure
assumes that each bit should be composed of at least 1000 photons. Thus, the total energy of 1000 photons
sets  the  approximate  boundary  for  this  region  of  spontaneous  switching.  For  a  wavelength  of  850  nm,  this
implies a minimum switching energy on the order of 0.2 fJ. For the thermal transfer region, it is assumed that
for  continuous  operation,  the  thermal  energy  present  in  the  device  cannot  be  removed  any  faster  than  100
W/cm2  (1  mW/mm2).  There  has  been  some  work  done  to  indicate  that  this  value  could  be  as  large  as  1000
W/cm2. This region also assumes that there will be no more than an increase of 20(cid:176)C in the temperature of
the device. Devices can be operated in this region using a pulsed rather than continuous mode of operation.
Thus, high energy pulses can be used if sufﬁcient time is allowed between pulses to allow the absorbed energy
to  be  removed  from  the  devices.  The  cloud  in  Fig.  79.30  represents  the  performance  capabilities  of  current
electronic devices. This ﬁgure illustrates that optical devices will not be able to switch states orders of magnitude
faster than electronic devices when the system is in a continuous rather than a pulsed mode of operation. There
are, however, other considerations in the use of photonic switching devices than how fast a single device can
change states. Assume that several physically small devices need to be interconnected so that the state infor-
mation  of  one  device  can  be  used  to  control  the  state  of  another  device.  To  communicate  this  information,
there needs to be some type of interconnection with a large bandwidth that will allow short pulses to travel
between the separated devices. Fortunately, the optical domain can support the bandwidth necessary to allow
bit rates in excess of 100 Gb/s, which will allow high-speed communication between these individual switching
devices. In the electrical domain, the communications bandwidth between two or more devices is limited by
the resistance, capacitance, and inductance of the path between the different devices. Therefore, even though
photonic devices cannot switch orders of magnitude faster than their electronic counterparts, the communi-
cations  capability  or  transmission  bandwidth  present  in  the  optical  domain  should  allow  higher  data  rate
systems than are possible in the electrical domain.