Recording by Laser Power Modulation (LPM)
In this traditional approach to thermomagnetic recording, the electromagnet produces a constant ﬁeld, while
the information signal is used to modulate the power of the laser beam. As the disk rotates under the focused
spot,  the  on/off  laser  pulses  create  a  sequence  of  up/down  domains  along  the  track.  The  Lorentz  electron
micrograph in Fig. 80.30(b) shows a number of domains recorded by LPM. The domains are highly stable and
may  be  read  over  and  over  again  without  signiﬁcant  degradation.  If,  however,  the  user  decides  to  discard  a
recorded block and to use the space for new data, the LPM scheme does not allow direct overwrite; the system
must erase the old data during one disk revolution cycle and record the new data in a subsequent revolution cycle.
During erasure, the direction of the external ﬁeld is reversed, so that up-magnetized domains in Fig. 80.30(a)
now become the favored ones. Whereas writing is achieved with a modulated laser beam, in erasure the laser
stays on for a relatively long period of time, erasing an entire sector. Selective erasure of individual domains is
not practical, nor is it desired, since mass data storage systems generally deal with data at the level of blocks,
which  are  recorded  onto  and  read  from  individual  sectors.  Note  that  at  least  one  revolution  period  elapses
between the erasure of an old block and its replacement by a new block. The electromagnet therefore need not
be capable of rapid switchings. (When the disk rotates at 3600 rpm, for example, there is a period of 16 ms or
so between successive switchings.) This kind of slow reversal allows the magnet to be large enough to cover all
the tracks simultaneously, thereby eliminating the need for a moving magnet and an actuator. It also affords a
relatively large gap between the disk and the magnet, which enables the use of double-sided disks and relaxes
the mechanical tolerances of the system without overburdening the magnet’s driver.