in the cloud but lowers positive cloud charge. An even less frequent type of cloud-to-ground lightning is initiated
in an upward direction from tall man-made structures such as TV towers or tall geographical features such as
mountaintops. A complete lightning discharge of any type is called a ﬂash. The usual negative cloud-to-ground
lightning  ﬂash  starts  in  the  cloud  when  a  so-called  preliminary  breakdown,  a  particular  type  of  electric
discharge in the cloud, occurs. This process is followed by a discharge, termed the stepped leader, that propagates
towards the ground in a series of luminous steps tens of meters in length. In progressing toward the ground,
the negatively charged stepped leader branches in a downward direction. When one or more leader branches
approach within a hundred meters or so of the ground, after 10 to 20 ms of stepped leader travel at an average
speed of 105 to 106 m/s, the electric ﬁeld at the ground (or at objects on the ground) increases above the critical
breakdown  ﬁeld  of  the  surrounding  air  and  one  or  more  upward-going  discharges  is  initiated,  starting  the
attachment process. After traveling a few tens of meters, one of the upward-going discharges, which is essentially
at ground potential, contacts the tip of one branch of the stepped leader, which is at a high negative potential,
probably some tens of megavolts. From that point, ground potential propagates upward, discharging to ground
some or all of the negative charge previously deposited along the channel by the stepped leader. This upward
propagating potential discontinuity is called the return stroke. Its front is a region of high electric ﬁeld that
causes  increased  ionization,  current,  temperature,  and  pressure  as  it  travels  the  5-km  or  more  length  of  the
leader channel. That trip is made in about 100 ms at an initial speed of the order of one third to one half the
speed of light, the speed decreasing with height. The current at ground associated with the negative ﬁrst return
stroke  has  a  peak  of  typically  35  kA  achieved  in  a  few  microseconds,  has  a  maximum  current  derivative  of
about 1011 A/s and falls to half of peak value in some tens of microseconds. The cessation of the ﬁrst return
stroke current may or may not end the ﬂash. If more cloud charge is made available to the ﬁrst stroke channel
by in-cloud discharges, another leader-return stroke sequence may ensue, typically after tens of milliseconds.
Preceding and initiating a subsequent return stroke is a continuous leader lowering negative charge, called a
dart leader. The dart leader typically propagates down the residual channel of the previous stroke, generally
ignoring the ﬁrst stroke branches, although in about 50% of cloud-to-ground ﬂashes there is at least one dart
leader which transforms to a stepped leader on the downward trip, creating a new path to ground. There are
typically three or four leader-return stroke sequences per negative cloud-to-ground ﬂash, but ten or more is
not uncommon.