Architecture for a Computer Relay
There are many ways of implementing computer-based relays. Figure 61.48 is a fairly typical block diagram of
a computer relay architecture. The input signals consisting of voltage and currents and contact status are ﬁltered
to remove undesired frequency components and potentially damaging surges. These signals are sampled by the
CPU under the control of a sampling clock. Typical sampling frequency used in a modern digital relay varies
between 4 and 32 times the nominal power system frequency. The sampled data is processed by the CPU with
a digital ﬁltering algorithm, which estimates the appropriate relaying quantity. A typical relaying quantity may
be  the  rms  value  of  a  current,  the  voltage  or  current  phasor,  or  the  apparent  impedance.  The  estimated
parameters  are  then  compared  with  prestored  relay  characteristics,  and  the  appropriate  control  action  is
initiated. The decision of the relay is communicated to the substation equipment, such as the circuit breaker,
through  the  output  ports.  These  outputs  must  also  be  ﬁltered  to  block  any  surges  from  entering  the  relay
through  the  output  lines.  In  most  cases,  the  relay  can  also  communicate  with  the  outside  world  through  a
modem. The data created by a fault is usually saved by the relaying computer and can be used for fault analysis
or for sequence-of-event analysis following a power system disturbance. The user may interface with the relay
through a keyboard, a control panel, or a communication port. In any case, provision must be made to enter
relay settings in the relay and to save these settings in case the station power supply fails. Although the block
diagram in Fig. 61.48 shows different individual subsystems, the actual hardware composition of the subsystems
is dependent on the computer manufacturer. Thus, we may ﬁnd several microprocessors in a given implemen-
tation, each controlling one or more subsystems. Also, the hardware technology is in a state of ﬂux, and in a
few years, we may see an entirely different realization of the computer relays.