Leads
The purpose of the pacemaker lead(s) is to provide a link between the pulse generator and the cardiac tissue
in order to efﬁciently sense and stimulate the heart. The majority of leads are inserted intravenously and attached
to the inside of the heart. Modern leads are composed of ﬁve major parts, including the connector, conductor(s),
insulation, electrode(s), and a ﬁxation mechanism [Kay, 1996]. The electrode design is critical to minimizing
current drain during pacing while ensuring reliable sensing. It has been shown that the pacing threshold is a
function  of  the  current  density  at  the  electrode  [Stokes  and  Bornzin,  1985].  Minimizing  the  radius  of  the
electrode  will  maximize  current  density  and  therefore  reduce  the  pacing  threshold  and  current  drain.  In
addition, a small radius will increase the electrode resistance, which also helps to reduce current drain. Con-
versely,  it  has  been  shown  that  a  large  electrode  surface  area  decreases  sensing  impedance  and  electrode
polarization [Kay, 1996]. Electrode polarization is caused by a buildup of charge on the cardiac tissue after a
stimulation pulse and can affect the electrode’s ability to sense properly. The ideal electrode would, therefore,
minimize the radius while maximizing the surface area [Sinnaeve et al., 1987]. This has been accomplished by
building electrodes with a small radius but with complex microscopic mesh or porous structure to maximize
surface  area  [Kay,  1996;  Bornzin  et  al.,  1983].  Electrode  material  varies  among  manufacturers,  but  is  often
comprised of a platinum alloy. The conductor serves as the electrical pathway between the pulse generator and
the  electrodes.  It  must  have  low  impedance  and  be  able  to  withstand  repeated  ﬂexing  due  to  heart  motion.
This  is  generally  accomplished  using  a  nickel  alloy  and  coiling  the  wire  to  resist  stress.  There  will  be  one
conductor in the lead for unipolar conﬁgurations and two conductors for bipolar. Unipolar leads use a single
electrode at the tip of the lead with the reference being the metal shell of the pacemaker. Bipolar leads use two
closely spaced electrodes near the tip of the lead, which is helpful in rejecting external noise when sensing. The
conductor  must  be  insulated  by  a  material  that  can  withstand  ﬂexing  and  is  resistant  to  harsh  biological
conditions. Silicone rubber and polyurethane are two commonly used insulating materials. The connector pin
provides  a  physical  link  between  the  lead  and  the  pulse  generator  and  was  standardized  by  an  international
meeting of manufacturers to avoid confusion when mixing brands of leads and pacemakers [Calfee and Saulson,
1986]. Finally, the ﬁxation mechanism is responsible for holding the lead in place on the heart. The two major
types  of  ﬁxation  are  known  as  active  and  passive  ﬁxation.  The  most  common  active  mechanism  involves  a
helical screw that is advanced into the tissue [Markewitz et al., 1988]. The most common passive mechanism
uses ﬂexible tines that become entrapped in the cardiac tissue [Furman et al., 1979]. Fibrous tissue often grows
around the ﬁxation mechanism due to tissue injury. This further stabilizes the lead but can cause pacing thresholds
to increase over time. A good ﬁxation mechanism will minimize tissue injury while ensuring a stable anchor.
Some designs use a steroid-eluting electrode to minimize and stabilize ﬁbrous tissue growth [Timmis et al., 1983].