VSAT networks fall into three general categories: broadcast networks, point-to-point networks, and inter-
active  networks.  In  a  broadcast  network,  a  centralized  hub  station  broadcasts  data,  audio,  and/or  video  to  a
group  of  receive-only VSATs.  Low-cost  receive-only VSATs  can  receive  news,  weather  services,  and  ﬁnancial
information.  Music  distribution  and  video  broadcast  via  broadcast  networks  is  widely  used.  Point-to-point
networks  provide  direct  communication  between  two  locations  without  the  requirement  of  a  large  hub  for
data, voice, and image transmission. Variations of these networks include point-to-multipoint dedicated circuits
or  demand-assigned  mesh  topologies.  Interactive  networks  are  used  for  two-way  communications  services
between a central hub station and a large number of VSATs in a star topology. Table 102.3 is a summary of the
salient features of VSAT networks. VSATs are available for both C- and Ku-band frequency. Most VSAT systems
use BPSK modulation with Rate 1/2 FEC. For interactive networks, the inbound channel is shared on contention
basis  to  conserve  space  segment.  More  advanced  systems  use  concatenated  codes  to  improve  performance.
Recently, hybrid VSATs have been introduced to use terrestrial networks on the return channel. An example is
the Hugh’s Direct PC which uses a high speed satellite receive channel, and a low speed terrestrial return channel.
A critical element of VSAT networks is the network availability. The VSAT system availability is affected by
three major components: effects of rain attenuation, equipment availability, and software availability. The effects
of rain attenuation for Ku-band networks are signiﬁcant. While link availability is usually speciﬁed at 99.5%,
link performance can be optimized to nearly any desired value through the use of energy dispersion techniques
or large antenna sizes. The network hardware must be highly reliable. Hub hardware should provide for optional
redundancy and the ability to achieve better than 99.9% availability. The use of hub diversity and uplink power
control can also be used to improve the network availability. The VSAT hardware availability is less catastrophic;
the loss of one VSAT does not constitute network failure but may require a service call to rectify the problem.
Hence,  it  is  common  to  use  nonredundant  but  highly  reliable  VSAT  units.  Software  availability  needs  to  be
improved since software failures dominate the overall availability of interactive networks in existing VSAT products.
Interactive networks have been by far the most popular for data communication and audio/video overlays.
The remaining portion of this section is devoted to these networks. An interactive VSAT system consists of a