by  the  sense  electrodes.  There  are  multiple  deﬂections  in  an  electrogram  during  one  heartbeat  due  to  near-
ﬁeld  and  far-ﬁeld  cardiac  activity.  In  a  ventricular  electrogram,  the  far-ﬁeld  activity  is  associated  with  the
depolarization of the atria (P waves), and the near-ﬁeld activity is associated with the depolarization (R waves)
and repolarization (T waves) of the ventricles. The R waves, which are the largest and fastest deﬂections, indicate
a depolarization wavefront located directly below the sensing electrode and are, therefore, used as a means to
count the heart rate. Circuitry used to sense R waves usually involves voltage comparators and slew rate detectors.
Since the R wave deﬂection normally has a larger amplitude and faster slew rate than the other deﬂections, the
circuitry can use reference thresholds to detect the R waves. The thresholds may be dynamic and determined
by a complicated algorithm that has been termed autosensing [Jacobson and Kroiss, 1996; Castro et al., 1996;
Kim,  1998].  In  addition,  there  may  be  a  brief  ampliﬁer  blanking  period  after  an  R  wave  is  detected  during
which all further deﬂections are ignored (so as to avoid potential inappropriate sensing of following T waves).
In  dual-chamber  pacemakers,  it  is  necessary  to  measure  an  atrial  electrogram  in  addition  to  the  ventricular
electrogram.  Similar  detection  strategies  are  employed  in  the  atria;  however,  due  to  the  large  mass  of  the
ventricles compared to the atria, the far-ﬁeld ventricular activity in an atrial electrogram is more difﬁcult to
reject. A sensed cardiac event is marked by a digital pulse that is input into the timing circuitry. The timing
circuitry determines if the heart rate is too slow and also controls all ampliﬁer blanking periods and pacing rates.
In addition to far-ﬁeld effects, many other sources of external noise exist in an electrogram, such as motion
artifact, electrode polarization, noise from the skeletal muscles, and environmental noise (e.g., 60-Hz noise and
cellular phones). Using bandpass ﬁlters and closely spaced bipolar electrodes minimizes external noise. In the
event of extreme interference, backup pacing circuits can assume control and asynchronously pace the heart
until the noise is gone.