Historical Perspective
In 1875, Caton published the initial account of the recording of the spontaneous electrical activity of the brain
from the cerebral cortex of an experimental animal. The amplitude of these electrical oscillations was so low,
that is, on the order of microvolts, that Caton’s discovery is all the more amazing because it was made 50 years
before suitable electronic ampliﬁers became available. In 1924, Hans Berger, of the University of Jena in Austria,
carried out the ﬁrst human EEG recordings using electrical metal strips pasted to the scalps of his subjects as
electrodes and a sensitive galvanometer as the recording instrument. Berger was able to measure the irregular,
m
V)  coming  from  the  brain.  By  studying  the  successive
relatively  small  electrical  potentials  (i.e.,  50  to  100 
positions of the moving element of the galvanometer recorded on a continuous roll of paper, he was able to
observe the resultant patterns in these brain waves as they varied with time. From 1924 to 1938, Berger laid
the foundation for many of the present applications of electroencephalography. He was the ﬁrst to use the word
electroencephalogram in describing these brain potentials in man. Berger noted that these brain waves were
not entirely random, but instead displayed certain periodicities and regularities. For example, he observed that
although these brain waves were slow (i.e., exhibited a synchronized patter of high amplitude and low frequency,
<3 Hz) in sleep and states of depressed function, they were faster (i.e., exhibited a desynchronized pattern of
low amplitude and high frequency, 15–25 Hz) during waking behavior. He suggested, quite correctly, that the
brain’s activity changed in a consistent and recognizable fashion when the general status of the subject changed,
as from relaxation to alertness. Berger also concluded that these brain waves could be greatly affected by certain
pathological conditions after noting the marked increase in the amplitude of these brain waves brought about
by  convulsive  seizures.  However,  in  spite  of  the  insights  provided  by  these  studies,  Berger’s  original  paper
published in 1929 did not excite much attention. In essence, the efforts of this most remarkable pioneer were
largely ignored until similar investigations were carried out and veriﬁed by British investigators.