Artiﬁcial intelligence had strong ties with automatic control during its early development stages several decades
ago.  Typical  examples  of  these  ties  are  the  development  of  cybernetics,  robotics,  and  early  learning  systems.
Recent efforts to incorporate aspects of artiﬁcial intelligence into the design and operation of automatic control
systems have focused on using techniques such as artiﬁcial neural networks, fuzzy logic, and expert systems.
The application of one or more of these techniques in the design of control systems has come to be known as
intelligent control [Antsaklis et al., 1994], a term questioned by some for its implications. Whether or not such
systems  should  be  classiﬁed  as  intelligent,  they  represent  signiﬁcant  contributions  to  the  ﬁeld  of  automatic
control, as evidenced by the rapidly growing wealth of literature devoted to the successful application of such
systems to complex control problems [Chow and Menozzi, 1994a; 1994b; Chow and Teeter, 1997; Chow and
Yee, 1991; Hunt et al., 1992; Miller et al., 1990; Nguyen and Widrow, 1990; Psaltis et al., 1988; Werbos, 1990].
The nonlinear functional mapping properties of Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) are central to their use
in system identiﬁcation and control [Narendra and Parthasarathy, 1990]. Although a number of key theoretical
problems remain, results pertaining to the approximation capabilities of neural networks demonstrate that they
have great promise in the modeling and control of nonlinear systems. The artiﬁcial neural network technology
has become increasingly popular as a tool for performing tasks such as automatic control, system identiﬁcation,
pattern recognition, and time series prediction. Most of the conventional methods, such as PI control, are based
on mathematical and statistical procedures for the modeling of the system and the estimation of the optimal
controller  parameters.  In  practice,  the  plant  to  be  controlled  is  often  highly  nonlinear  and  a  mathematical
model may be difﬁcult to derive. In such cases, conventional techniques may prove to be suboptimal and may
lack robustness in the face of modeling error, because they are only as accurate as the model that was used to
design them. With the advancement of technology, however, sophisticated control using artiﬁcial neural network
techniques has been developed and used successfully to improve the control of systems that cannot be easily
handled by conventional control, thus giving rise to terminology such as neural control and intelligent control.
Usually,  a  human  operator  is  responsible  for  adjusting  the  controller’s  parameters  in  order  to  use  his/her
own idea of good performance. Indirectly, the operator is performing a minimization of a cost function based
on his/her knowledge. More generally, when confronted with a problem situation, humans execute a mapping
between a set of events and the set of corresponding appropriate actions. The appropriateness of these actions
is due to some basic acquired knowledge, or even instinct, that guides the initial stages of the mapping. Then,
through experience and a set of implicit guidelines, the human learns to perform a better mapping. This is an
ongoing process throughout a person’s life. Similarly, an ANN, if given initial guidance, can learn to improve
its performance through a set of guidelines, (e.g., minimize a cost function). In fact, a properly structured ANN
can  learn  any  arbitrarily  complicated  mapping  [Cybenko,  1989;  Rumelhart  and  McClelland,  1986;  Werbos,
1974].