Landing  guidance  throughout  the  western  world,  and  increasingly  in  China,  India,  and  the  former  Soviet
Union, is with the Instrument Landing System (ILS). Transmitters adjacent to the runway create a horizontal
guidance signal near 110 MHz and a vertical guidance signal near 330 MHz. Both signals are modulated such
that the nulls intersect along a line in space that leads an aircraft from a distance of about 10 nmi to within 50
ft above the runway. ILS gives no information about where the aircraft is located along the beam except at two
. Most ILS installations are certiﬁed to the International Civil Aviation Orga-
or three vertical 
, where the pilot must abort the landing if the runway is not visible at an altitude
nization’s (ICAO) 
, which allows the aircraft to descend to 100
of 200 ft. One hundred ILSs (in 1996) were certiﬁed to 
  allows  an  aircraft  to  land  at  still  lower  weather  ceilings.
ft  before  aborting  for  lack  of  visibility. 
Category III landing aids are of special interest in Western Europe, which has the worst ﬂying weather in the
developed  world.  Category  III  ILS  detects  its  own  failures  and  switches  to  a  redundant  channel  within  one
second to protect aircraft that are ﬂaring-out (within 50 ft of the runway) and can no longer execute a missed
approach. Once above the runway, the aircraft’s bottom-mounted radar altimeter measures altitude and either
the electronics or the pilot guides the ﬂare maneuver. Landing aids are described by Kayton and Fried [1997].
Throughout  the  western  world,  civil  aircraft  use VOR/DME  whereas  military  aircraft  use  Tacan/DME  for
en-route navigation. In the 1990s, China and the successor states to the Soviet Union were installing ICAO-
standard navigation aids (VOR, DME, ILS) at their international airports and along the corridors that lead to
them  from  the  borders.  Overﬂying  western  aircraft  navigate  inertially,  with  Omega,  or  with  GPS.  Domestic
ﬂights within the Soviet Union depended on radar tracking, non-directional beacons, and an L-band range-
angle system called “RSBN”. They will eventually upgrade to a satellite-based enroute and landing system.