The quality of representation of the image is determined by how close spatially the pixels are located and
how  many  levels  or  numbers  are  used  in  the  quantization,  i.e.,  how  coarse  or  ﬁne  is  the  quantization.  The
sampling accuracy is usually measured in how many pixels there are in a given area and is cited in pixels/unit
 One would desire to use the lowest rate possible
length, i.e., pixels/cm. This is known as the 
to minimize the number of pixels needed to represent the object. If the sampling rate is too low, then obviously
some  details  of  the  object  to  be  imaged  will  not  be  represented  very  well.  In  fact,  there  is  a  mathematical
theorem which determines the lowest sampling rate possible to preserve details in the object. This rate is known
  sampling  rate  (named  after  the  late  Bell  Laboratories  engineer  Harry  Nyquist).  The  theorem
as  the 
 the highest possible detail one expects to image in the object. If the
states that the sampling rate must be 
object has details closer than, say 1 mm, one must take at least 2 pixels/mm. (The Nyquist theorem actually
says more than this, but a discussion of the entire theorem is beyond the scope of this section.) If we sample
at a lower rate than the theoretical lowest limit, the resulting digital representation of the object will be distorted.
 errors. Aliasing errors usually manifest themselves
This type of distortion or sampling error is known as 
 to
in the image as moiré patterns (Fig. 17.2). The important point to remember is that there is a 
the spatial sampling rate such that object detail can be maintained. The sampling rate can also be stated as the
total number of pixels needed to represent the digital image, i.e., the matrix size (or grid size). One often sees
these sampling rates cited as 256 
 512, and so on. If the same object is imaged with a large matrix
  512,  or
size,  the  sampling  rate  has  obviously  increased.  Typically,  images  are  sampled  on  256 
 1024 grids, depending on the application and type of modality. One immediately observes an important
1024 
issue in digital representation of images: that of the large number of pixels needed to represent the image. A
 512 image has 262,144 pixels! We shall return to this point
256 
later when we discuss processing or storage of these images.