Every loss mechanism will exhibit its own characteristic tand
loss peak, centered at a particular absorption frequency, v
o for
a given test temperature. The loss behavior will be contingent
upon the molecular structure of the material, its thickness, and
homogeneity, and the temperature, frequency, and electric ﬁeld
range over which the measurements are performed [Bartnikas
and  Eichhorn,  1983].  For  example,  dipole  orientation  losses
will  be  manifested  only  if  the  material  contains  permanent
molecular  or  side-link  dipoles;  a  considerable  overlap  may
occur  between  the  permanent  dipole  and  ionic  relaxation
regions.  Ionic  relaxation  losses  occur  in  dielectric  structures
where ions are able to execute short-range jumps between two
or  more  equilibrium  positions.  Interfacial  or  space  charge
polarization  will  arise  with  insulations  of  multilayered  struc-
tures  where  the  conductivity  and  permittivity  is  different  for
the  individual  strata  or  where  one  dielectric  phase  is  inter-
spersed in the matrix of another dielectric. Space charge traps also occur at crystalline-amorphous interfaces,
crystal defects, and oxidation and localized C-H dipole sites in polymers. Alternatively, space charge losses will
occur with mobile charge carriers whose movement becomes limited at the electrodes. This type of mechanism
takes place often in thin-ﬁlm dielectrics and exhibits a pronounced thickness effect. If the various losses are
considered schematically on a logarithmic frequency scale at a given temperature, then the tand and e¢ values
will appear as functions of frequency as delineated schematically in Fig. 55.2. For many materials the dipole
and  ionic  relaxation  losses  tend  to  predominate  over  the  frequency  range  extending  from  about  0.5  to  300
MHz, depending upon the molecular structure of the dielectric and temperature. For example, the absorption
peak of an oil may occur at 1 MHz, while that of a much lower viscosity ﬂuid such as water may appear at
approximately 100 MHz. There is considerable overlap between the dipole and ionic relaxation loses, because
the ionic jump distances are ordinarily of the same order of magnitude as the radii of the permanent dipoles.
Space charge polarization losses manifest themselves normally over the low-frequency region extending from
10–6 Hz to 1 MHz and are characterized by very broad and intense peaks; this behavior is apparent from Eq.
(55.7), which indicates that even small conductivities may lead to very large tand values at very low frequencies.
The nonrelaxation-type electronic conduction losses are readily perceptible over the low-frequency spectrum
and decrease monotonically with frequency.