Voltage-Fed Inverter Induction Motor Drive
A simple and popular converter system for speed control of an induction motor is shown in Fig. 30.43. The
front-end diode rectiﬁer converts 60 Hz ac to dc, which is then ﬁltered to remove the ripple. The dc voltage is
then converted to variable-frequency, variable-voltage output for the machine through a PWM bridge inverter.
Among a number of PWM techniques, the sinusoidal PWM is common, and it is illustrated in Fig. 30.44 for
one phase only. The stator sinusoidal reference phase voltage signal is compared with a high-frequency carrier
wave, and the comparator logic output controls switching of the upper and lower transistors in a phase leg.
The phase voltage wave shown refers to the ﬁctitious center tap of the ﬁlter capacitor. With the PWM technique,
the fundamental voltage and frequency can be easily varied. The stator voltage wave contains high-frequency
ripple, which is easily ﬁltered by the machine leakage inductance. The voltage-to-frequency ratio is kept constant
to provide constant airgap ﬂux in the machine. The machine voltage-frequency relation, and the corresponding
torque, stator current, and slip, are shown in Fig. 30.45. Up to the base or rated frequency wb, the machine can
develop  constant  torque.  Then,  the  ﬁeld  ﬂux  weakens  as  the  frequency  is  increased  at  constant  voltage.  The
speed  of  the  machine  can  be  controlled  in  a  simple  open-loop  manner  by  controlling  the  frequency  and
maintaining the proportionality between the voltage and frequency. During acceleration, machine-developed
torque should be limited so that the inverter current rating is not exceeded. By controlling the frequency, the
operation can be extended in the ﬁeld weakening region. If the supply frequency is controlled to be lower than
the machine speed (equivalent frequency), the motor will act as a generator and the inverter will act as a rectiﬁer,
and energy from the motor will be pumped back to the dc link. The dynamic brake shown is nothing but a
buck converter with resistive load that dissipates excess power to maintain the dc bus voltage constant. When