Impregnated-paper insulation constitutes one of the earliest insulating systems employed in electrical power
apparatus and cables. Although in some applications alternate solid- or compressed-gas insulating systems are
now  being  used,  the  impregnated-paper  system  still  constitutes  one  of  the  most  reliable  insulating  systems
available. Proper impregnation of the paper results in a cavity-free insulating system, thereby eliminating the
occurrence of partial discharges that inevitably lead to deterioration and breakdown of the insulating system.
The cellulose structure of paper has a ﬁnite acidity content as well as a residual colloidal or bound water, which
is  held  by  hydrogen  bonds.  Consequently,  impregnated  cellulose  base  papers  are  characterized  by  somewhat
more elevated tand values in the order of 2 3 10–3 at 30 kV cm–1. The liquid impregnants employed are either
mineral oils or synthetic ﬂuids. Since the dielectric constant of these ﬂuids is normally about 2.2 and that of
dried cellulose about 6.5–10, the resulting dielectric constant of the impregnated paper is approximately 3.1–3.5.
Lower-density cellulose papers have slightly lower dielectric losses, but the dielectric breakdown strength is
also reduced. The converse is true for impregnated systems utilizing higher-density papers. The general chemical
formula  of  cellulose  paper  is  C12H20O10.  If  the  paper  is  heated  beyond  200(cid:176)C,  the  chemical  structure  of  the
paper breaks down even in the absence of external oxygen, since the latter is readily available from within the
cellulose molecule. To avert this process from occurring, cellulose papers are ordinarily not used beyond 100(cid:176)C.
In an attempt to reduce the dielectric losses in solid-liquid systems, cellulose papers have been substituted
in some applications by synthetic papers (cf. Table 55.3). For example in extra-high-voltage cables, cellulose
paper–polypropylene composite tapes have been employed. A partial paper content in the composite tapes is
necessary  both  to  retain  some  of  the  impregnation  capability  of  a  porous  cellulose  paper  medium  and  to
maintain  the  relative  ease  of  cellulose-to-cellulose  tape  sliding  capability  upon  bending.  In  transformers  the
synthetic nylon or polyamide paper (nomex) has been used both in ﬁlm and board form. It may be continuously
operated at temperatures up to 220(cid:176)C.