p
m
m
g
z
g
z
z
(cid:229)
(cid:229)
g
l
l
f
˛
(cid:229)
F
Vocal Tract Length Normalization (VTL)
Several attempts have been made to model variations in vocal tract length across several speakers. The idea was
originally introduced by Bamberg [42] and revived through a parametric approach in [39]. Assume a uniform
tube with length L for the model of the vocal tract. Then each formant frequency will be proportional to 1/L.
The ﬁrst-order effect of a difference in vocal tract length is the scaling of the frequency axis. The idea behind
VTL is to rescale or warp the frequency axis during the signal processing step in a speech recognition system,
to make speech from all speakers appear as if it was produced by a vocal tract of a single standard length. Such
normalizations have led to signiﬁcant gains in accuracy by reducing variability amongst speakers and allowing
the pooling of training data for the construction of sharper models. Three VTL methods have been recently
proposed.  In  [39],  a  parametric  method  of  normalization  which  counteracts  the  effect  of  varied  vocal  tract
length is presented. This method is particularly useful when only a small amount of training data is available
and  requires  the  determination  of  the  formant  frequencies.  In  [40],  an  automated  method  is  presented  that
uses a simple generic voiced speech model to rapidly select appropriate frequency scales. This generic model
is a mixture of 256 multiversity Gaussians with diagonal covariances trained on the unwarped data. Different
warp  scales  are  selected  to  linearly  transform  the  frequency  axis  of  the  speaker’s  data.  The  resulting  warped
features are scored against the generic model. The warp scale that scores the best is selected as the warp scale
for that speaker. An iterative process updates the generic model with the new features obtained after warping
each  speaker  with  the  best  warp  scale.  Once  the  best  warp  scales  for  each  speaker  have  been  determined,  SI
models are built with the appropriately warped feature vectors. This warp selection method allows data from
all speakers to be merged into one set of cannonical models. In [41], a class of transforms are proposed which
achieve a remapping of the frequency axis much like the conventional VTL methods. These mappings known
as all-pass transforms, are linear in the cepstral domain which makes speaker normalization simple to imple-
ment. The parameters of these transforms are computed using conjugate gradient methods.