Tunnel Diodes
Tunnel diodes [Sze, 1981] generate active characteristics by a mechanism involving the physical tunneling of
electrons between energy bands in highly doped semiconductors. For example, if a pn junction diode is heavily
doped,  the  conduction  and  valence  bands  will  be  located  in  close  proximity  and charge carriers  can  tunnel
through the electrostatic barrier separating the p-type and n-type regions, rather than be thermionically emitted
over the barrier as generally occurs in this type of diode. When the diode is biased (either forward or reverse
bias)  current  immediately  ﬂows  and  junction  conduction  is  basically  ohmic.  In  the  forward  bias  direction,
conduction  occurs  until  the  applied  bias  forces  the  conduction  and  valence  bands  to  separate.  The  tunnel
current then decreases and normal junction conduction occurs. In the forward bias region where the tunnel
current is decreasing with increasing bias voltage, a negative immittance characteristic is generated. The immit-
tance is called “N-type” because the I-V characteristic “looks like” the letter N. This type of active element is
short-circuit stable and is described by a negative conductance in shunt with a capacitance. Tunnel diodes are
limited in operation frequency by the time it takes for charge carriers to tunnel through the junction. Since
this time is very short (on the order of 10–12 s) operation frequency can be very high, approaching 1000 GHz.
Tunnel  diodes  have  been  operated  at  hundreds  of  gigahertz,  limited  by  practical  packaging  and  parasitic
impedance considerations. The RF power available from a tunnel diode is limited (hundreds of milliwatts level)
since the maximum RF voltage swing that can be applied across the junction is limited by the forward turn-
on characteristics of the device (typically 0.6–0.9 V). Increased RF power can only be obtained by increasing
device area to increase RF current, but device area is limited by operation frequency according to an inverse
scaling law. Tunnel diodes have moderate dc-to-RF conversion efﬁciency (<10%), very low noise ﬁgures, and
are useful in low-noise systems applications, such as microwave and millimeter-wave receivers.