(TM). In practice, the transition metals constitute roughly 80 atomic percent of the alloy (i.e., x . 0.2). In the
transition  metal  subnetwork,  the  fraction  of  cobalt  is  usually  small,  typically  around  10%,  and  iron  is  the
dominant element (z . 0.9). Similarly, in the rare earth subnetwork Tb is the main element (y . 0.9) while
the gadolinium content is small or it may even be absent in some cases. Since the rare earth elements are highly
reactive  to  oxygen,  RE-TM  ﬁlms  tend  to  have  poor  corrosion  resistance  and,  therefore,  require  protective
coatings. In multilayer disk structures, the dielectric layers that enable optimization of the medium for the best
optical/thermal behavior also perform the crucial function of protecting the MO layer from the environment.
The amorphous nature of the material allows its composition to be continuously varied until a number of
desirable properties are achieved. In other words, the fractions x, y, z of the various elements are not constrained
by  the  rules  of  stoichiometry.  Disks  with  very  large  areas  can  be  coated  uniformly  with  thin  ﬁlms  of  these
media, and, in contrast to polycrystalline ﬁlms whose grains and grain boundaries scatter the beam and cause
noise,  amorphous  ﬁlms  are  continuous,  smooth,  and  substantially  free  from  noise.  The  ﬁlms  are  deposited
either by sputtering from an alloy target or by co-sputtering from multiple elemental targets. In the latter case,
the substrate moves under the various targets and the fraction of a given element in the alloy is determined by
the time spent under each target as well as the power applied to that target. During ﬁlm deposition the substrate
is kept at a low temperature (usually by chilled water) in order to reduce the mobility of deposited atoms and
thus inhibit crystal growth. The type of the sputtering gas (argon, krypton, xenon, etc.) and its pressure during
sputtering, the bias voltage applied to the substrate, deposition rate, nature of the substarte and its pretreatment,
and temperature of the substrate all can have dramatic effects on the composition and short-range order of
the deposited ﬁlm. A comprehensive discussion of the factors that inﬂuence ﬁlm properties will take us beyond
the intended scope here; the interested reader may consult the vast literature of this ﬁeld for further information.