Leads
The leads provide the means by which to deliver the energy of the deﬁbrillation shock from the pulse generator
to the heart, as well as pacing and sensing capabilities. They are insulated with either medical-grade silicone
rubber or polyurethane, except at the electrodes. A major disadvantage of these leads is that they deliver current
in  a  largely  nonuniform  manner  as  compared  to  the  older  patch  electrodes,  which  results  in  higher  energy
requirements for deﬁbrillation. Fortunately, advances in battery, capacitor, circuit, and waveform technology
have compensated for this greater energy requirement while still allowing the ICDs to become smaller. Because
electrode position is important, many different electrode shocking conﬁgurations have been attempted. One
of the most popular is to place one electrode in the right ventricle (RV) and the return electrode in the superior
vena cava (SVC). In addition to deﬁbrillation electrodes, there must be pacing and sensing electrodes as well.
Currently, three major conﬁgurations exist to accommodate these requirements. The ﬁrst, known as the single
pass lead, integrates two deﬁbrillation coil electrodes (RV, SVC) and ventricular pace/sense electrodes onto a
single lead. The second conﬁguration consists of one lead, which contains the RV deﬁbrillation electrode and
the ventricular pace/sense electrodes, and a second lead, which contains the return deﬁbrillation electrode. The
third conﬁguration consists of one lead containing both deﬁbrillation electrodes and a separate lead containing
the ventricular sense/pace electrodes. Some systems use the titanium housing of the ICD as an additional return
electrode in the “active can” conﬁguration in an attempt to distribute the current more evenly throughout the
ventricles. Also,  the  most  modern  ICD  systems  utilize  atrial  pace/sense  electrodes  in  addition  to  ventricular
electrodes to achieve dual-chamber pacing and sensing capabilities. Another requirement of the deﬁbrillation