At ﬁrst glance, the design of a cochlear prosthesis to restore hearing appears daunting. The hearing range of
a  healthy  young  individual  is  20  to  16,000  Hz.  The  transducing  structure,  the  cochlea,  has  3500  inner  and
12,000 outer hair cells, each best activated by a speciﬁc frequency that causes a localized mechanical resonance
in  the  basilar  membrane  of  the  cochlea.  Deﬂection  of  a  hair  cell  causes  the  cell  to  ﬁre  an  all-or-none  (i.e.,
pulsatile) neuronal discharge, whose rate of repetition depends to a ﬁrst approximation on the amplitude of
the stimulus. The outputs of these hair cells have an orderly convergence on the 30,000 to 40,000 ﬁbers that
make up the auditory portion of the eighth cranial nerve. These afferent ﬁbers, in turn, go to brainstem neurons
that process and relay the signals on to higher brain centers [Klinke, 1983]. For many causes of deafness, the
hair cells are destroyed, but the eighth nerve remains intact. Thus, if one could elicit activity in a speciﬁc output
ﬁber by means other than the hair cell motion, perhaps some sense of hearing could be restored. The geometry
of the cochlea helps in this regard as different portions of the nerve are closer to different parts of the cochlea.
Electrical stimulation is now used in the cochlear implant to bypass hair cell transduction mechanisms [Loeb,
1985; Clark et al., 1990]. These sophisticated devices have required that complex signal processing, electronic,
and packaging problems be solved. One current cochlear implant has 22 stimulus sites along the scala tympani
of the cochlea. Those sites provide excitation to the peripheral processes of the cells of the eighth cranial nerve,
which are splayed out along the length of the scala. The electrode assembly itself has 22 ring electrodes spaced
along its length and some additional guard rings between the active electrodes and the receiver to aid in securing
the very ﬂexible electrode assembly after it is snaked into the cochlea’s very small (a few millimeters) round
window (a surgeon related to me that positioning the electrode was akin to pushing a piece of cooked spaghetti
through a small hole at the end of a long tunnel). The electrode is attached to a receiver that is inlaid into a
slot milled out of the temporal bone. The receiver contains circuitry that can select any electrode ring to be a
source and any other electrode to be a sink for the stimulating current, and that can rapidly sequence between
various pairs of electrodes. The receiver is powered and controlled by a radiofrequency link with an external
transmitter, whose alignment is maintained by means of a permanent magnet imbedded in the receiver.