IMPATT Diodes
IMPATT  (impact  avalanche  transit  time)  diodes  [Bhartia  and
Bahl, 1984] are fabricated from pn or Schottky junctions. A typical
pn junction device is shown in Fig. 39.12. For optimum RF per-
formance the diode is separated, by use of specially designed layers
of controlled impurity doping, into avalanche and drift regions.
In operation the diode is reverse biased into avalanche breakdown.
Due to the very sensitive I-V characteristic, it is best to bias the
diode using a constant current source in which the magnitude of
the current is limited. When the diode is placed in a microwave
resonant circuit, RF voltage ﬂuctuations in the bias circuit grow
and are forced into a narrow frequency range by the impedance
characteristics of the resonant circuit. Due to the avalanche pro-
cess the RF current across the avalanche region lags the RF voltage
by 90 degrees. This inductive delay is not sufﬁcient, by itself, to
produce  active  characteristics.  However,  when  the  90  degrees
phase shift is added to that arising from an additional inductive
delay caused by the transit time of the carriers drifting through
the  remainder  of  the  diode  external  to  the  avalanche  region,  a
phase  shift  between  the  RF  voltage  and  current  greater  than  90
degrees is obtained. A Fourier analysis of the resulting waveforms
reveals a device impedance with a negative real part. That is, the
device is active and can be used to generate or amplify RF signals.
The  device  impedance  has  an “S-type”  active  characteristic  and
the device equivalent circuit consists of a negative resistance in series with an inductor. The device has signiﬁcant
pn junction capacitance that must be considered, and a complete equivalent circuit would include the device
capacitance in parallel with the series negative resistance-inductance elements. For optimum performance the
drift region is designed so that the electric ﬁeld throughout the RF cycle is sufﬁciently high to produce velocity
saturation for the charge carriers. In order to achieve this, it is common to design complex structures consisting
of alternating layers of highly doped and lightly doped semiconductor regions. These structures are called “high-
low,” “low-high-low,” or “Read” diodes, after the man who ﬁrst proposed their use. They can also be fabricated
in  a  back-to-back  arrangement  to  form  double-drift  structures.  These  devices  are  particularly  attractive  for
millimeter-wave applications. IMPATT diodes can be fabricated from most semiconductors, but are generally
fabricated from Si or GaAs. The devices are capable of good RF output power (mW to W) and good dc-to-RF
conversion efﬁciency (~10–20%). They operate well into the millimeter-wave region and have been operated
as high as 340 GHz. They have moderate bandwidth capability, but have relatively poor noise performance due
to the impact ionization process.