Immunosensor
Commercial  techniques  for  detecting  antibody-antigen  binding  utilize  optical  or  x-radiation  detection.  An
optically ﬂuorescent molecule or radioisotope is nonspeciﬁcally attached to the species of interest in solution.
The complementary binding species is chemically attached to a glass substrate or glass beads which are packed
into  a  column.  The  tagged  solution  containing  the  species  of  interest,  say  the  antibody,  is  passed  over  the
antigen-coated surface, where the two selectively bind. After the speciﬁc binding occurs, the nonbound ﬂuo-
rescent molecules or radioisotopes are washed away, and the antibody concentration is determined by ﬂuores-
cence spectroscopy or with a scintillation counter, respectively. These sensing techniques are quite costly and
bulky, and therefore other biosensing mechanisms are rapidly being developed. One experimental technique
uses  the  change  in  the  mechanical  properties  of  the  bound  antibody-antigen  complex  in  comparison  to  an
 
51
unbound surface layer of antigen. It uses a shear mode, surface acoustic wave (SAW) device (see Chapter
and [Ballentine et al., 1997]) to sense this change as a change in the propagation time of the wave between the
generating electrodes and the pick-up electrodes some distance away on the same piezoelectric substrate. The
substrate surface is coated with the antigen and it is theorized that upon selectively binding with the antibody,
this layer stiffens, changing the mechanical properties of the interface and therefore the velocity of the wave.
The  advantages  of  this  device  are  that  the  SAW  device  produces  an  electrical  signal  (a  change  in  oscillation
frequency  when  the  device  is  used  in  the  feedback  loop  of  an  oscillator  circuit)  which  is  dependent  on  the
amount of bound antibody; it requires only a very small amount of the antigen which can be very costly; the
entire  device  is  small,  robust  and  portable;  and  the  detection  and  readout  method  is  inexpensive.  However,
there  are  numerous  problems  which  currently  preclude  its  commercial  use,  speciﬁcally  a  large  temperature
sensitivity and responses to nonspeciﬁc adsorption, i.e., by species other than the desired antibody.