Bipolar Transistors
A cross-sectional view of a bipolar transistor is shown in Fig. 39.14. The bipolar transistor consists of back-to-
back  pn  junctions  arranged  in  a  sandwich  structure.  The  three  regions  are  designated  the  emitter,  base,  and
collector. This type of device differs from the ﬁeld-effect transistors in that both electrons and holes are involved
in  the  current  transport  process  (thus  the  designation  bipolar).  Two  structures  are  possible:  pnp  or  npn,
depending upon the conductivity type common to both pn junctions. Generally, for microwave applications
the npn structure is used since device operation is controlled by electron ﬂow. In general, electron transport
is faster than that for holes, and npn transistors are capable of superior high-frequency performance compared
to comparable pnp transistors. In operation, the base-emitter pn junction is forward biased and the collector-
base pn junction is reverse biased. When an RF signal is applied to the base-emitter junction the junction allows
a current to be injected into the base region. The current in the base region consists of minority charge carriers
(i.e., carriers with the opposite polarity compared to the base material—electrons for an npn transistor). These
charge carriers then diffuse across the base region to the base-collector junction, where they are swept across
the junction by the large reverse bias electric ﬁeld. The reverse bias electric ﬁeld in the base-collector region is
generally  made  sufﬁciently  large  that  the  carriers  travel  at  their  saturation  velocity.  The  transit  time  of  the
charge carriers across this region is small, except for millimeter-wave transistors where the base-collector region
transit time can be a signiﬁcant fraction of the total time required for a charge carrier to travel from the emitter
through  the  collector.  The  operation  of  the  transistor  is  primarily  controlled  by  the  ability  of  the  minority
charge carriers to diffuse across the base region. For this reason microwave transistors are designed with narrow
base  regions  in  order  to  minimize  the  time  required  for  the  carriers  to  travel  through  this  region.  The  base
region transit time is generally the limiting factor in determining the high-frequency capability of the transistor.
The  gain  of  the  transistor  is  also  signiﬁcantly  affected  by  minority  carrier  behavior  in  the  base  region.  The
density of minority carriers is signiﬁcantly smaller than the density of majority carriers (majority carrier density
is  approximately  equal  to  the  impurity  doping  density)  for  typical  operating  conditions  and  the  probability
that the minority charge will recombine with a majority carrier is high. If recombination occurs, the minority
charge cannot reach the base-collector junction but appears as base current. This, in turn, reduces the current
gain capability of the transistor. Narrow base regions reduce the semiconductor volume where recombination
can occur and, therefore, result in increased gain. Modern microwave transistors typically have base regions
on the order of 0.1–0.25 mm.