Individual oscillations in the Sun are damped; in the absence of continual excitation they would die out in a few days. Resonating interference between propagating waves produces global standing waves, known also as normal modes. Analysis of these modes constitutes the discipline of global helioseismology.
Solar oscillation modes are divided up into three basic categories, according to their dominant restoring force: pressure dominates in p modes, and buoyancy in gravity modes, both internal (g modes) and surface (f modes):
p-mode dynamics is determined by the variation of the speed of sound inside the sun. Oscillations with amplitudes great enough to be detectable have frequencies between about 1 and 5 mHz, and are particularly strong in the 2-4 mHz range, where they are often referred to as "5-minute oscillations". (Note: 5 minutes per cycle is 1/300 cycles per second = 3.33 mHz.) At the solar surface, individual p modes have velocity amplitudes of order 10 cm/s, implying displacement amplitudes of a few meters and causing intensity fluctuations of a few parts per million, and are readily detectable with Doppler imaging or sensitive spectral line intensity imaging. Thousands of p modes of high and intermediate degree l (see below for the wavenumber degree l) have been detected by both GONG and the Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI) instrument aboard the SOHO spacecraft, with those of degree l below 200 clearly separated and higher degree modes ridged together. Modes of very low degree have been observed most successfully in light integrated over the entire image of the Sun, by both ground-based networks of observatories such as BiSON distributed about the world to obtain continuous temporal coverage, and by the GOLF instrument aboard the SOHO spacecraft.
g modes are standing internal gravity waves whose principal restoring force is negative buoyancy of vertically displaced material, hence the name "g mode". They are of relatively low frequency (0-0.4 mHz). They are confined either to the interior of the sun below the convection zone (the inner 70 per cent by radius), or to the atmosphere. Because they cannot propagate through convectively unstable regions (in which the temperature gradient exceeds the adiabatic lapse rate, buoyancy is positive and the force on a displaced element of fluid is not restoring), the former are practically unobservable at the surface. The g modes are said to be evanescent in the convection zone, and are thought to have residual velocity amplitudes of only millimeters per second at the photosphere, though perhaps they are more prominent as temperature perturbations. Since the 1980s, there have been several claims of g-mode detection, including one claimed in 2007 using the GOLF data. At the GONG2008 / SOHO XXI conference held in Boulder, the Phoebus group reported that it could not confirm these findings, putting an upper limit of 3 mm/s on g-mode amplitudes, right at the detection limit of the GOLF instrument. The Phoebus group has recently published a review of the current state of g-mode knowledge.
f modes are surface gravity waves, and, aside from the modes of lowest degree l, are confined to the near-surface layers of the Sun, penetrating to a depth of about R/l beneath the photosphere, where R is the radius of the Sun. The frequencies of high-degree f modes are determined essentially by just the surface gravity and the horizontal wavelength, and depend only very weakly on the structure of the Sun. Their terrestrial counterparts are deep water waves, and in the limit of high degree l they share the same dispersion relation. Deviations from that limiting relation provide information principally about the density stratification of the surface layers of the Sun Doppler shifts brought about by advection have been measured by MDI (see below), to set constraints on the horizontal subsurface flow