Helioseismology is the process of inferring the internal structure and kinematics of the Sun from the propagation of seismic waves, particularly acoustic waves (p waves) and surface gravity waves (f waves). It was developed by analogy to geoseismology (originally called simply seismology), and subsequently there emerged asteroseismology, in which seismic waves are analysed to constrain the internal structures of other stars. Because the Sun is fluid, to a first approximation it cannot support shear waves (s-waves), unlike the seismic waves on Earth. An exception is the magneto-acoustic waves which appear to be important only in the atmosphere. The helioseismic waves are generated by the turbulence in the convection zone immediately beneath the Sun's surface. Certain frequencies are amplified by constructive interference, leading to resonance. In other words, the turbulence "rings" the sun like a bell. The resonant waves are reflected near the photosphere, the visible surface of the sun, where they can be observed. The oscillations are detectable in almost any time series of solar images, but are best observed by measuring the Doppler shift of atmospheric absorption lines. Details of the propagation of the seismic waves through the Sun, inferred from the resonant frequencies, reveal the Sun's inner structure, allowing astrophysicists to develop an extremely detailed representation of the hydrostatic stratification and the internal angular velocity. That has permitted the evaluation of the quadrupole moment,




J

2


=
1.8
×

10

−
7




{\displaystyle J_{2}=1.8\times 10^{-7}}
, and higher-order moments  of the Sun's external gravitational potential. It is a more accurate and more robust procedure than trying to infer it from the oblateness of the visible disc. Together with measurements of the orbits of Mercury and of spacecraft, the result is consistent with General Relativity.
Helioseismology has been able to rule out the possibility that the solar neutrino problem was a result of incorrect static models of the interior of the Sun.   Features revealed by helioseismology include that the outer convective zone and the inner radiative zone rotate differently, which is thought by some to generate the main magnetic field at least in the outer layers of the Sun by a dynamo effect. Broadly speaking, the angular velocity of the convection zone decreases from equator to the poles, varying only weakly with depth; the radiative envelope beneath rotates almost uniformly. These two regions are separated by a shear layer called the tachocline, which is too thin to be resolved directly by seismological analysis alone. The convective zone has "jet streams" of plasma (called torsional oscillations) thousands of kilometers below the surface. The jet streams form broad fronts at the equator, breaking into smaller cyclonic storms at high latitudes. Torsional oscillations are the time variation in solar differential rotation. They are alternating bands of faster and slower rotation. So far there is no generally accepted theoretical explanation for them, even though a close relation to the solar cycle is evident, as they have a period of eleven years, as was known since they were first observed in 1980.
Helioseismology can also be used to image the far side of the Sun from the Earth, including sunspots. In simple terms, sunspots both absorb and deflect helioseismic waves, causing a seismic deficit where next they encounter the photosphere. To facilitate spaceweather forecasting, seismic images of the central portion of the solar far side have been produced nearly continuously since late 2000 by analysing data from the SOHO spacecraft, and since 2001 the entire far side has been imaged with these data.