In the final years of World War II, Nazi Germany researched and developed low-cost anti-tank weapons. Large anti-tank cannon firing high velocity projectiles were the best option, but expensive to produce and required a well trained crew. They also lacked mobility on the battlefield once emplaced. Anti-tank rocket launchers and recoilless rifles, while much lighter and simpler to manufacture, gave the gunner's position away and were not as accurate as anti-tank cannons. Recoilless rifles used a huge amount of propellant to fire the projectile, with estimates ranging from only one-fifth to one-ninth of the propellant gases being used to push the projectile forward. The German military asked for an anti-tank weapon with performance in-between that of the standard high velocity cannon and the cheaper rocket and recoilless infantry anti-tank weapons. They also stipulated that any solution had to be more efficient in the use of propellant, as the German war industry had reached maximum cannon propellant production capacity.
In 1944, the German firm Rheinmetall-Borsig came up with a completely new concept for propelling a projectile from a cannon, which, while not recoilless, greatly diminished recoil and drastically reduced the manufacturing cost. This concept was called the Hoch-und-Niederdruck System which roughly translates to "High-Low Pressure System". With this system, only the very back of the cannon's breech had to be reinforced against the high firing pressures.
Rheinmetall designed an anti-tank cannon using their "High-Low Pressure System" that fired a standard general-purpose HE 8.1-cm mortar bomb which had been modified to function as an anti-tank round with a shaped charge. Normally, a mortar bomb cannot be fired from a cannon, because its thin walls cannot endure the high stress forces placed upon it while being fired from a cannon. The 8.1-cm round was mounted on a rod which was fixed to a round steel plate with eight holes in it. A shear pin held the round to the rod. The round and the plate were fitted at the mouth of a cut-down cannon shell casing which contained two propellant bags. On firing, the pressure would build up in the shell casing, which along with the reinforced breech acted as the "High Pressure Chamber" and bled out the steel plate holes at half the pressure to the thinner walled cannon barrel which acted as the "Low Pressure Chamber". Unlike standard cannons, in which the propellant "kicks" the projectile out the barrel with an almost instant acceleration to maximum muzzle velocity, the Rheinmetall concept "shoved" the projectile out the barrel at a constantly increasing muzzle velocity. There was recoil, but nowhere near the recoil of the 5-cm and 7.5-cm anti-tank cannons being used at that time by the German forces, which required a heavy constructed carriage, and both a heavy and complex hydraulic recoil-mechanism as well as a muzzle brake to contain the massive recoil on firing. The Rheinmetall solution required only a lightweight recoil-unit and muzzle brake.
The 81mm weapon weighed significantly less than even the then obsolete 50mm cannon and Allied 57mm guns, less than a seventh the weight of the 88mm Pak it was to supplement, and less than a tenth of the weight of the famous 88mm anti-aircraft gun turned anti-tank weapon.
The only major drawback was its maximum range of 750 meters (in direct fire against tanks), but this was offset by an armor penetration of 140 mm and no telltale back-blast. At over 500 meters, this was superior to both the German long barrel 75mm cannon, and the American 76mm gun, even when equipped with tungsten high velocity armor-piercing rounds.  The Germans ordered the Rheinmetall gun into production, designating it as the 8-cm Panzer Abwehr Werfer 600 (PAW 600). Only about 250 were produced before the war's end. None were reported to have seen combat.
The High-Low system developed on the PAW 600 was later used to propel the shells for the ubiquitous American 40mm grenade launcher.