As g-forces increase, visual effects include loss of colour vision ("grey-out"), followed by tunnel vision (where peripheral vision is lost, retaining only the centre vision). If g-forces increase further, complete loss of vision will occur, while consciousness remains. These effects are due to a reduction of blood flow to the eyes before blood flow to the brain is lost, because the extra pressure within the eye (intraocular pressure) counters the blood pressure. The reverse effect is experienced in advanced aerobatic maneuvers under negative g-forces, where excess blood moves towards the brain and eyes "red out".
The human body has different tolerances for g-forces depending on the acceleration direction. Humans can withstand a positive acceleration forward at higher g-forces than they can withstand a positive acceleration upwards at the same g-force. This is because when the body accelerates up at such high rates the blood rushes from the brain which causes loss of vision.
A further increase in g-forces will cause G-LOC where consciousness is lost. This is doubly dangerous because, on recovery as g is reduced, a period of several seconds of disorientation occurs, during which the aircraft can dive into the ground. Dreams are reported to follow G-LOC which are brief and vivid.
The g thresholds at which these effects occur depend on the training, age and fitness of the individual. An untrained individual not used to the g-straining maneuver can black out between 4 and 6 g, particularly if this is pulled suddenly. Roller coasters typically do not expose the occupants to much more than about 3 g. A hard slap on the face may impose hundreds of g-s locally but may not produce any obvious damage; a constant 15 g-s for a minute, however, may be deadly. A trained, fit individual wearing a g suit and practising the straining maneuver can, with some difficulty, sustain up to 9 g without loss of consciousness.
The human body is considerably more able to survive g-forces that are perpendicular to the spine. In general, when the g-force pushes the body forwards (colloquially known as 'eyeballs in') a much higher tolerance is shown than when g-force is pushing the body backwards ('eyeballs out') since blood vessels in the retina appear more sensitive to that direction.
Early experiments showed that untrained humans were able to tolerate 17 g eyeballs-in (compared to 12 g eyeballs-out) for several minutes without loss of consciousness or apparent long-term harm.