The discovery of a field as a physical object begins with Michael Faraday. Faraday coined the term "magnetic field" in his Researches when postulating, after discovering that all the constituent materials of a human are diamagnetic, that if a human were set in a sufficiently strong magnetic field then they too would align with the field. Faraday did not conceive of this field as a mere mathematical construct for calculating the forces between particles—having only rudimentary mathematical training, he had no use for abstracting reality to make quantitative predictions. Instead he conjectured that there was "force" filling the space where electromagnetic fields were generated and reasoned qualitatively about these forces with "force lines:"

"Important to the definition of these lines is that they represent a determinate and unchanging amount of force. Though, therefore, their forms, as they exist between two or more centers or sources of power, may vary greatly, and also the space through which they may be traced, yet the sum of power contained in any one section of a given portion of the lines is exactly equal to the sum of power in any other section of the same lines, however altered in form or however convergent or divergent they may be at the second place."

Faraday's insights into the behavior of magnetic fields would prove invaluable to James Clerk Maxwell's course to unite electricity and magnetism into one theory. Prior to writing his Treatise, Maxwell began to use Faraday's lines to reason about electromagnetic behavior, and started to believe in their physical existence:

"The beautiful illustration of the presence of magnetic force afforded by this experiment ([iron filings aligning in a magnetic field]), naturally tends to make us think of the lines of force as something real, and as indicating something more than the mere resultant of two forces, whose seat of action is at a distance, and which do not exist there at all until a magnet is placed in that part of the field. We are dissatisfied with the explanation founded on the hypothesis of attractive and repellent forces directed towards the magnetic poles, even though we may have satisfied ourselves that the phenomenon is in strict accordance with that hypothesis, and we cannot help thinking that in every place where we find these lines of force, some physical state or action must exist in sufficient energy to produce the actual phenomena."

But even after his Treatise and subsequent discovery of light as an electromagnetic wave, Maxwell continued to believe in the aether theory:

"Another theory of electricity which I prefer denies action at a distance and attributes electric action to tensions and pressures in an all-pervading medium, these stresses being the same in kind with those familiar to engineers, and the medium being identical with that in which light is supposed to be propagated."

This was viewed as a desirable feature for a physical description to have, as it would make no reference to actions at distances. In her book detailing the history of the concept of action at a distance, the philosopher of science Mary Hesse writes:

"There is a physical difference between a gravitational field ... and the velocity field of a fluid. In the latter case the field function is an actual property of material at every point of the field, but in the gravitational case the potential function V is 'potential' in the sense that it does not necessarily describe a material property of the field ... it describes a potential property, namely, the force that would be exerted if a small mass were introduced into the field at that point."

But the discovery of special relativity and the subsequent Michelson-Morley experiment conclusively demonstrated that an aether whose motion as a fluid would explain the effects of electromagnetism could not exist, as Einstein explained:

"Recapitulating, we may say that according to the general theory of relativity space is endowed with physical qualities; in this sense, therefore, there exists an ether. According to the general theory of relativity space without ether is unthinkable; for in such space there not only would be no propagation of light, but also no possibility of existence for standards of space and time (measuring-rods and clocks), nor therefore any space-time intervals in the physical sense. But this ether may not be thought of as endowed with the quality characteristic of ponderable media, as consisting of parts which may be tracked through time. The idea of motion may not be applied to it."

Hence it was made clear that in the case of electromagnetism there is no underlying material through which the forces must propagate. In these cases there can be no distinction made between the effects of a field arising through a potential and the effects of an "action at a distance" force; they are mathematically equivalent and cannot predict different phenomena from which one or the other perspective may be falsified. In the regime of classical physics, there is a fundamental duality between action at a distance and field effects.