Hook echoes are a reflection of the movement of air inside and around a supercell thunderstorm. Ahead of the base of the storm, the inflow from the environment is sucked in by the instability of the airmass. As it moves upward, it cools slower than the cloud environment, because it mixes very little with it, creating an echo free tube which ends at higher levels to form a bounded weak echo region or BWER.
At the same time, a mid-level flow of cool and drier air enters the thunderstorm cloud. Because it is drier than the environment, it is less dense and sinks down behind the cloud and forms the rear flank downdraft, drying the mid level portion of the back of the cloud. Those two currents have a rotation, due to the vertical windshear, and interact to form a mesocyclone. Tightening of the rotation due to the interaction of those two air currents near the surface will create the tornado.

Near the interaction zone at the surface, there will be a dry slot caused by the updraft on one side and the cloudy area below the rear flank downdraft on the other side. This is the source of the hook echo seen on radar near the surface. Hook echoes are thus a relatively reliable indicator of tornadic activity, however, they merely indicate the presence of a larger mesocyclone structure in the tornadic storm rather than directly detecting a tornado. During some destructive tornadoes, debris lofted from the surface may be detected as a "debris ball" on the end of the hook structure.
Not all thunderstorms exhibiting hook echoes produce tornadoes, and not all tornado-producing supercells contain hook echoes. Also, especially preceding the advent of the more advanced Doppler weather radars, by the time a hook echo could be detected a tornado had often already formed—especially when the storm was far away from the location of the radar.
The use of Doppler weather radar systems, such as NEXRAD, allows for the detection of strong, low-level mesocyclones that produce tornadoes even when the hook echo is not present and also grant greater certainty when a hook echo is present. By detecting hydrometeors moving toward and away from the radar location, the relative velocities of air flowing within different parts of a storm are revealed. These areas of tight rotation known as "velocity couplets" are now the primary trigger for the issuance of a tornado warning. The tornado vortex signature is an algorithm-based detection of this.