On most streets in the United States and Canada, odd numbers are on one side and even numbers on the other. Often, the number assigned is proportional to the distance from some baseline, so not all numbers are used. On very long roads or in areas sufficiently far from the baseline, four- or five-digit addresses are common.
For example, along the Overseas Highway in the Florida Keys, house numbers indicate their distance from Mile Marker 0 in Key West. The mileage is found by dividing the house number by 1000 (for example, 77220 Overseas Highway is 77.2 miles from Mile Marker 0). In rural areas, typical numbering may be 1000 for each mile from the nearest town center or radiating from a certain zero-point at the corner or center of a county.
In many localities, addresses often increase by 100 for each cross street, so that the building numbers in each block vary only in the last two digits. In some cities they are consecutive within each block, so that a block where one side is numbered 501, 503, 505, 507, 509, 511 is followed by a block beginning with 601. Generally, within a single city there is a single base point used for all addresses; numbering of all streets therefore reflects its distance from that base point, and directionals (north, south, east, west) are used to refer to buildings on streets which run in that direction and are in that direction from the base point.
The numbering system thus resembles a Cartesian coordinate system. Most cities start their numbering from the base point in either single-digits or at 100. For example, if an address is located six blocks north of a city's base point, it would likely be numbered in either the 600 or 700 range and often the designator "north" added to the street name. This is often omitted if the street does not cross beyond the base point or changes names when doing so.
Some cities such as Albuquerque and Washington, D.C. use a quadrant system with two perpendicular roads, highways, railroads, or other geographic line or boundary forming the X and Y axis of the numbering system. Here, the block numbers increase with distance from the intersecting axis, and the quadrant is suffixed to the street name (i.e. 98th St SW, San Mateo Blvd NE) regardless if the road crosses into another quadrant or not. It is common to indicate block numbers on street signs.
Often, where streets are lettered or numbered, the address numbers on perpendicular streets will use the number of the lower-numbered cross street as the "hundreds" portion of the number for each block. For example, in Washington, D.C., the block of 7th Street NW, between D and E Streets NW, is designated as the "400" block, meaning that building numbers on that block are in the range from 400 to 499 inclusive.
Some older sections of cities, such as Boston, Philadelphia, or New York, have used numbering systems that assigned consecutively, without skipping over numbers to reserve them for future use. When newer infill buildings and entrances were constructed, fractional numbers such as "½" or "¼" were assigned (for example, the address 10½ Beacon Street in Boston refers to the Boston Athenæum). In older cities that grew by annexation of nearby municipalities, the street numbers may never be reassigned following a merger. For example, in the city of Boston, the same street number may be assigned multiple times as Washington Street passes through the South End, Roxbury, Forest Hills, Roslindale, and West Roxbury neighborhoods. In such cases, the neighborhood of the city must always be specified to indicate an unambiguous street address.
Apartment demarcation is usually a decision of the local authority. In most cities, numbers are assigned to each apartment per floor or by suites for office buildings or letter/number combinations, while in duplex, divided building or Polish flat settings, fractional numbers are assigned. In Milwaukee and many cities in Wisconsin, apartments are often demarcated by a letter such as A, B, C, etc. for each apartment above the main apartment on the first floor (i.e. 604D in an address would refer to the fourth apartment in that structure).