The Vickers design included an elliptic chamber which confined the radial motion of the vanes nested in the rotor slots. As the rotor and vanes turn, each vane is first pushed radially inward followed by a maximum radial extension and that happens twice per revolution. The displacement of the fixed device is calculated by determining the difference in vane extension between minimum and maximum, times the axial length of the vanes and rotor. This multiplies to an area subject to the hydraulic pressure in the device whether used as a motor or a pump. Then an average of the minimum and maximum extensions establishes a 'radius of motion' for the pressurized equivalent pressure/force area. of each vane which passes one of the 4 axial sealing areas. What happens is that this equivalent area patch travels through the circumference or the equivalent linear distance resulting from rotating the 'radius of motion' through one complete revolution of 360 degrees.
The elliptic chamber is called a 'cam ring' by the industry. As a vane moves into, say, a maximum extension, and then rotates into a minimum extension region of the cam ring, it passes through a gradual transition from maximum to minimum followed by a gradual transition back to maximum and this happens twice per revolution. In order to prevent oil under pressure from bypassing the vanes, 4 sealing areas are created by means of 4 kidney shaped ports located in the transition areas between minimum and maximum. The spaces between the kidney ports are called the sealing areas and this port system is located at either, or both axial ends of the rotor and vanes. The configuration of the ports and sealing areas are such that the space between any two adjacent vanes is slightly less than the coverage of the sealing area. In other words, as the vanes rotate through the sealing area, for a small amount of rotation, both adjacent vanes are within the sealing area. As the rotation continues, the first vane in line leaves the sealing area, but not before the next vane in succession is firmly in the sealing region.
The effect is to prevent the exchange of oil from any two adjacent chambers located on either side of a given sealing area and the oil can only be interchanged by the actual rotation of the rotor and vanes. This is the pumping mechanism for the historical vane pump or motor. The term 'pressure balanced' comes from the fact that pressure in any chamber is matched by the same pressure in the diametrically opposite chamber and the hydraulic radial side thrust calculated by a 'side view area' and the two forces are opposite and cancel; hence the name 'pressure balanced'.