The Hyperloop UPV team has designed a new magnetic levitation system for the future of transportation.
There are two main levitation methods:
Electromagnets: they need electrical power, like batteries, to work. But lifting the whole pod would require a lot of batteries.
Permanent magnets: they can lift big loads without electricity consumption, but mass variations in the pod could make the system unstable, sticking the pod to the top of the tube.
The Hyperloop UPV team combines both levitation methods:
Permanent magnets produce the main lift force and electromagnets control the gap distance to the tube.
This way low energy consumption plus an accurate force control can be obtained.
If levitation units are located on top of the pod in radial configuration, an accurate control of the gap size can be achieved, obtaining a fully autonomous levitation system.
This rail-free levitation system has the following advantages:
Compensation of inertial forces: allowing a higher curve radius of the track.
Better tube sealing: reduction of leakages.
Savings in tube construction: no rails nor concrete inside the tube, a clean tube layout.
Enhanced scalability: possibility to increase the size for freight transportation and achieving supersonic speeds once solved the transonic limits.
The levitation system has been validated with a real model of a magnetic levitator from the Institute of Automatic Systems (ISA) available at the University. Firstly, the levitation system consistent in electromagnet-magnet has been validated to be controlled in a stable behavior and after that the proposal design has been simulated with the ANSYS Maxwell software.
In addition, dynamic behavior has been studied in order to obtain the influence of Lenz's Law. The result of the studies show that Lenz's Law reduces the effectiveness of the levitation system up to 75% at 260 m/s.
This fact could be overcome by reducing the gap thickness between the tube and the pod at high speeds, increasing EM current or oversizing the levitation system.
As a conclusion, the chosen layout for the levitation systems consists in 8 rings with 5 levitation units uniformly distributed along the pod length at the upper side.