The field of iatromathematics is allied to science; however, it lacks the applicability of the proper scientific method and is therefore considered a form of pseudoscience. It applies the study of astrology to medicine.
Iatromathematicians viewed the human body through astrological reasoning as well as mechanics. They associate various stars, or zodiac signs with the functioning of the human body. The twelve astrological signs contribute to each part of the body from head to toe. Moreover, planets and existing cosmos in space are correlated with certain parts of the body. Through examining a natal chart, iatromathematicians attempt to predict biological setbacks in an individual.
Iatromathematicians examine the active and energetic temperament of the human body. Moreover, they explore the causes of various health problems and attempt to find ways to treat certain detrimental diseases. In iatromathematics, there is a particular assumption that there is an impact of various energetic fields caused on the star bodies. The star body of an individual is often referred to by astrologists as an energetic matrix and is believed to be spawned by heavenly bodies such as the sun, moon, planets, and several other astrological signs.
Iatromathematicians study these conceptions and try to regulate the path of the star body of individuals so that it will give a positive, rather than a negative result. By doing so, they believe that it will contribute to a healthier lifestyle. Its doctrine is based on cosmobiology in which several emotional and physiological dilemmas in the body are associated with the positioning of celestial bodies in outer space.
Iatromathematics is closely correlated with biomechanics because the field of biomechanics investigates macrobiotic bodies to a macroscopic degree through the appliance of several engineering principles. The perspective of iatromathematicians differed from that of iatrophysicists and iatrochemists in terms of the way human bodies function. Iatrophysicists predicted the deviations from the biological norm of the body through the appliance of physics, while iatrochemists measured the detrimental problems of the body by chemical means.