Sketch 1 above shows a four-bar linkage where a number of instant centres of rotation are illustrated. The rigid body noted by the letters BAC is connected with links P1-A and P2-B to a base or frame.
The three moving parts of this mechanism (the base is not moving) are: link P1-A, link P2-B, and body BAC. For each of these three parts an instant centre of rotation may be determined.
Considering first link P1-A: all points on this link, including point A, rotate around point P1. Since P1 is the only point not moving in the given plane it may be called the instant centre of rotation for this link. Point A, at distance P1-A from P1, moves in a circular motion in a direction perpendicular to the link P1-A, as indicated by vector VA.
The same applies to link P2-B: point P2 is the instant centre of rotation for this link and point B moves in the direction as indicated by vector VB.
For determining the instant centre of rotation of the third element of the linkage, the body BAC, the two points A and B are used because its moving characteristics are known, as derived from the information about the links P1-A and P2-B.
The direction of speed of point A is indicated by vector VA. Its instant centre of rotation must be perpendicular to this vector (as VA is tangentially located on the circumference of a circle). The only line that fills the requirement is a line colinear with link P1-A. Somewhere on this line there is a point P, the instant centre of rotation for the body BAC.
What applies to point A also applies to point B, therefore this instant centre of rotation P is located on a line perpendicular to vector VB, a line colinear with link P2-B. Therefore, the instant centre of rotation P of body BAC is the point where the lines through P1-A and P2-B cross.
Since this instant centre of rotation P is the centre for all points on the body BAC for any random point, say point C, the speed and direction of movement may be determined: connect P to C. The direction of movement of point C is perpendicular to this connection. The speed is proportional to the distance to point P.
Continuing this approach with the two links P1-A and P2-B rotating around their own instant centres of rotation the centrode for instant centre of rotation P may be determined. From this the path of movement for C or any other point on body BAC may be determined.