The Intermediate eXperimental Vehicle (IXV) is a prototype unmanned reusable spaceplane; according to the ESA, the Intermediate part of its name is due to the shape of the vehicle not necessarily being representative of the envisioned follow-on production spacecraft. It possesses a lifting body arrangement which lacks wings of any sort; the size and shape is balanced between the need to maximise internal volume to accommodate experimental payloads while guaranteeing the mass to remain within the limits of the Vega launcher and favourable centre of gravity. The vehicle purposefully includes several key technologies of interest to the ESA, including its thermal protection system and the presence of active aerodynamic control surfaces. Control and manoeuvrability of the IXV is provided by a combination of these aerodynamic surfaces (comprising a pair of movable flaps) and thrusters throughout its full flight regime, which includes flying at hypersonic speeds.
A key role for the IXV is the gaining of data and experience in aerodynamically-controlled reentry, which has been claimed by the ESA to represent significant advance on earlier ballistic and quasi-ballistic techniques previously employed. Throughout each mission, representative reentry performance data is recorded in order to investigate aerothermodynamic phenomena and to validate system design tools and ground verification methods, which in turn supports future design efforts. Reentry is accomplished in a nose-high attitude, similar to the NASA-operated Space Shuttle; during this phase of flight, manoeuvring of the spaceplane is accomplished by rolling out-of-plane and then lifting in that direction, akin to a conventional aircraft. Landing is accomplished by an arrangement of parachutes, which are ejected during the descent through the top of the vehicle; additionally, seconds prior to landing, a series of airbags are inflate to soften the landing.
Another key ESA objective for the IXV was the verification of both its structure and its advanced thermal protection measures, specifically their performance during the challenging conditions present during reentry. The underside is covered by ceramic thermal protection panels composed of a blend of carbon fiber and silicon carbide directly fixed to the spaceplane's structure, while ablative materials comprising a cork and silicon-based composite material coat the vehicle's upper surfaces. The airframe was based on a traditional hot-structure/cold-structure arrangement; relying upon a combination of advanced ceramic and metallic assemblies, insulating materials, as well as the effective design of assorted attachments, junctions and seals; the role played by advanced navigation and control techniques was also deemed to be of a high importance. The IVX is supported on-orbit by a separate manoeuvring and support module, which is largely similar to the Resource Module that had been intended for use by the cancelled Hermes shuttle. The avionics of the IVX are controlled by a LEON2-FT microprocessor and are interconnected by a MIL-STD-1553B serial bus.
As an experimental vehicle primarily intended to gather data, various assorted sensors and pieces of monitoring equipment are present and operational throughout the full length of the flight in order to gather vast quantities of data to support the evaluation effort, including the verification of the vehicle's critical reentry technologies. The recorded data covers various elements of the IVX's flight, including its guidance, navigation and control systems, such as Vehicle Model Identification (VMI) measurements for post-flight reconstruction of the spacecraft's dynamic behaviour and environment, as well as the mandatory core experiments regarding its reentry technologies. Additionally, the IXV will typically carry complementary passenger experiments which, while not having been directly necessary to its mission success, serve to increase the vehicle's return on investment; according to the ESA, in excess of 50 such proposals had been received from a mixture of European industries, research institutes and universities, many having benefits to future launcher programmes (such as potential additional methods for guidance, navigation, control, structural health monitoring, and thermal protection) space exploration and scientific value. Throughout each mission, telemetry is broadcast to ground controllers to monitor the vehicle’s progress; however, phenomenon such as the build-up of plasma around the spaceplane during its re-entry has been known to block radio signals.