The phasing out of CFC and HCFC refrigerants (e.g., HCFC-22, also known as R22) due to global warming concerns has helped to spur innovations in cooling technologies. Natural refrigerants such as carbon dioxide (R744) and propane (R290), as well as R-410a, have become attractive replacements for air conditioning and refrigeration applications.
Higher pressures are typically required to condense these new environmentally friendly refrigerants compared to those that are being phased out. Small diameter copper tubes are more desirable in applications with higher pressures. For tubes of the same thickness, smaller diameter tubes can withstand higher pressures than larger diameter tubes. Hence, as tube diameters decrease, burst pressures increase. This is because working pressure is directly proportional to wall thickness and inversely proportional to diameter. By designing coils with shorter tube lengths, less work is required to circulate the refrigerant. Therefore, refrigerant pressure drop factors due to small diameter tubes can be offset.
Carbon dioxide (R744) refrigerants are used in modern vending machines, refrigerated supermarket display cases, ice-skating rinks, and other emerging applications. Microgroove’s smaller diameter copper tubes have the strength to withstand the very high gas cooler and burst pressures of R744 while allowing for lower overall refrigerant volumes.
Propane (R290) is an eco-friendly refrigerant with outstanding thermodynamic propertiies. The pressure requirements for R290 are much less than for carbon dioxide, but R290 is extremely flammable. Research has demonstrated that MicroGroove is suitable for R290-charged room air conditioners because the refrigerant charge requirement is dramatically reduced with smaller diameter copper tubes. The risk of tube explosions is dramatically reduced as well. Research conducted with propane in MicroGroove has implications for heat exchanger coils used in refrigerators, heat pumps and commercial air conditioning systems.