It is observed by the researchers that the characteristic behaviours of an isolated footing are affected if there exist other footing or group of footings close to each other and their individual zone of influence interfere with each other leading to interference phenomenon. The ultimate bearing capacity increases with decrease in the clear spacing between the footings and attains a peak magnitude at some critical spacing and thereafter with further decrease in clear spacing, the ultimate bearing capacity decreases and at spacing equal to zero the two footings act as an isolated footing of twice the width when width of two interfering footings are similar and loaded symmetrically. Moreover, the settlement at failure of interfering footing is observed to be greater than that of isolated footing at failure and the same decreases with increase in clear spacing between the footings. The variation of ultimate bearing capacity and settlement at failure of interfering footings were observed with respect to clearing spacing ratio by introducing efficiency factors which are defined as the ratio of magnitude of ultimate bearing capacity/settlement of interfering footings to that of the magnitude of ultimate bearing capacity/settlement of an isolated footing. The bearing capacity and the settlement of footings are the basic criterion which influence in the design of the footings and these are affected by the presence of one or more of the footings close to each other; however the interference phenomenon is not considered in the design of shallow footing. In the present scenario the structures may be forced to come close to each other or due to rapid urbanization, the buildings may be constructed in an irregular manner or due to lack of construction space or architecture of the building; the foundations or group of foundation may be laid close to each other which may lead to interference phenomenon and thereby influence the characteristic behaviour of an isolated footing which governs the design criterion and therefore make the motivation in the present study of interference of footings. So far the interference of footings is concerned all most all the study dealt with the interference phenomenon on ultimate bearing capacity and the settlement of interfering footings at failure for two or more closely spaced surface footings resting on either unreinforced or reinforced foundation soil beds. In the literature the foundation soil was considered to be cohesion-less, homogeneous, layered (each layer being homogeneous), Young’s modulus linearly varying with depth etc. and the interfering footings were strip, square, rectangular, circular in shapes resting on the surface of foundation soil medium. Most of the literature dealt with interfering footings of symmetrical geometry and loading conditions except Nainegali et al. Though the interference phenomenon has been observed and studied since Stuart, the effect of interference on the group of footings is not being considered in the design.


== References ==