DTL (Diode Transistor Logic) Gate
A circuit realization of a NAND gate will now be developed. By connecting NAND gates together
in various ways, one can synthesize other gates and ﬂip-ﬂops. Thus in principle, a single NAND
gate circuit, repeated many times, would be sufﬁcient to build up digital systems.
One possible NAND gate circuit is shown in Figure 9.2.1, in which it can have as many inputs
as desired (indicated by the dashed-line input C), and typical values of VCC = 5 V, RA = 2 k,
RC = 5 k, and β = 50. We shall now consider the two inputs A and B that are quite adequate for
our discussion, with the high range deﬁned to be 4 to 5 V and the low range deﬁned to be 0 to 0.5 V.
While the input voltages vA and vB are constrained to lie inside the high or low range of
the allowed voltage ranges, the resulting output voltage vF is supposed to be inside the high or
low range as well. For different combinations of vA and vB, we need to ﬁnd vF. Since the circuit
consists of no less than ﬁve nonlinear circuit elements (DA, DB, D1, D2, and T1), an approximation
technique is used for analysis, while taking the voltage across a current-carrying forward-biased
pn junction to be 0.7 V. The reader may have realized that it is not obvious at the start which
diodes are forward-biased and which are reverse-biased. Hence a guessing procedure is used in
which a guess is made and checked for self-consistency.
Let us start by letting vA = vB = 0, in which case a probable current path is from VCC down
through RA and through inputs A and B. Since this guess implies current ﬂow through DA and DB in
the forward direction, we may guess that the voltage at X is 0.7 V. There is also a current path from
X down to ground through D1 and D2 and the base–emitter junction of the transistor. Even though
the sign of the guessed voltage is correct to forward-bias these three junctions, its magnitude of
0.7 V is insufﬁcient since 2.1 V (or 3 × 0.7) is needed to make current ﬂow through this path.
Then iB = 0; the transistor is cut off; and the output voltage vF = VCC = 5 V, assuming that