Computer communications networks are the outcome of a combination of computers and telecom-
munication products. An interconnected group of independent computers and peripheral devices
that communicate with each other for the purpose of sharing software and hardware resources
is known as a computer communications network. A local-area network (LAN) is any physical
network technology that operates at high speed (usually tens of Mbits per second through several
Gbits per second) over short distances (up to a few thousand meters). Examples include Ethernet
and proNET-10. The stations, also known as nodes, within a LAN are physically linked with
each other through twisted pairs of copper wires, coaxial cables, or ﬁber-optic cables. A wide-
area network (WAN, also known as long-haul network) is any physical network that spans large
geographic distances, usually operates at slower speeds, and has signiﬁcantly higher delays than
a LAN. Stations within a WAN communicate with each other through standard telephone lines,
dedicated telephone lines, line-of-sight microwave systems, or ﬁber-optic links. Public-data
network (PDN) is network service offered by a common carrier, such as Telnet, Tymnet, and
Dataphone Digital Services of AT&T. ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency of the
U.S. Department of Defense) is an example of a private communications network. CYBERNET
is an example of a remote-access communications network that provides access to huge databases
for their users in different countries. The Internet is a collection of networks and gateways (special-
purpose dedicated computers attached to various networks routing packets of information from one
to the other), including the Milnet (military network) and NSFNET (National Science Foundation
network), that function as a single, cooperative virtual network providing universal connectivity
and application-level services such as the electronic mail. The Internet reaches many universities,
government research labs, and military installations in several countries.