When the load on a synchronous machine changes, the load angle changes from one steady
value to another. During this transition, oscillations in the load angle and consequent associated
mechanical oscillations (known as hunting) occur. To damp out these oscillations, it is common
practice to provide an additional short-circuited winding on the ﬁeld structure, made out of copper
or brass bars located in pole-face slots on the pole shoes of a salient-pole machine and connected
together at the ends of the machine. This additional winding (known as damper or amortisseur
winding) is shown in Figure 13.1.4. The winding is also useful in getting a synchronous motor
started, as explained in the subsection on elementary induction machines. When the machine
is operating under steady-state conditions at synchronous speed, however, this winding has no
effect. Because there is no rate of change of ﬂux linkage, no voltage is induced in it.
As seen in Figure 13.1.3, when δr is ±π/2 or 90°, the maximum torque or power (called pull-
out torque or pull-out power) is reached for a ﬁxed terminal voltage and a given ﬁeld current. If the
load requirements exceed this value, the motor slows down because of the excess shaft torque.
Synchronous-motor action is lost because the rotor and stator ﬁelds are no longer stationary
with respect to each other. Any load requiring a torque greater than the maximum torque results
in unstable operation of the machine; the machine pulls out of synchronism, known as pulling
out of step or losing synchronism. The motor is usually disconnected from the electric supply by
automatic circuit breakers, and the machine comes to a standstill. Note that the pull-out torque can
be increased by increasing either the ﬁeld current or the terminal voltage. In the case of a generator
connected to an inﬁnite bus, synchronism will be lost if the torque applied by the prime mover
exceeds the maximum generator pull-out torque. The speed will then increase rapidly unless the
quick-response governor action comes into play on the prime mover to control the speed.