Sir Isaac Newton at Encyclopædia Britannica
Works by Isaac Newton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Isaac Newton publications indexed by Google Scholar
ScienceWorld biography by Eric Weisstein
Dictionary of Scientific Biography
"The Newton Project"
"The Newton Project – Canada"
"Newton's Dark Secrets" – NOVA TV programme
from The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
"Isaac Newton", by George Smith
"Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica", by George Smith
"Newton's Philosophy", by Andrew Janiak
"Newton's views on space, time, and motion", by Robert Rynasiewicz

"Newton's Castle" – educational material
"The Chymistry of Isaac Newton", research on his alchemical writings
The "General Scholium" to Newton's Principia
Kandaswamy, Anand M. "The Newton/Leibniz Conflict in Context"
Newton's First ODE – A study by on how Newton approximated the solutions of a first-order ODE using infinite series
Isaac Newton at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
"The Mind of Isaac Newton" – images, audio, animations and interactive segments
Enlightening Science Videos on Newton's biography, optics, physics, reception, and on his views on science and religion
Newton biography (University of St Andrews)
"Newton, Sir Isaac". Encyclopædia Britannica. 19 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 583–592.
"Archival material relating to Isaac Newton". UK National Archives.
Portraits of Sir Isaac Newton at the National Portrait Gallery, London
The Linda Hall Library has digitized Two copies of John Marsham's (1676) Canon Chronicus Aegyptiacus, one of which was owned by Isaac Newton, who marked salient passages by dog-earing the pages so that the corners acted as arrows. The books can be compared side-by-side to show what interested Newton.
Writings by Newton
Newton's works – full texts, at the Newton Project
The Newton Manuscripts at the National Library of Israel – the collection of all his religious writings
Works by Isaac Newton at Project Gutenberg
Works by or about Isaac Newton at Internet Archive
Works by Isaac Newton at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks)
Descartes, Space, and Body and A New Theory of Light and Colour, modernised readable versions by Jonathan Bennett
Opticks, or a Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflexions and Colours of Light, full text on archive.org
"Newton Papers" – Cambridge Digital Library
(1686) "A letter of Mr. Isaac Newton... containing his new theory about light and colors", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, Vol. XVI, No. 179, pp. 3057–3087. – digital facsimile at the Linda Hall Library
(1704) Opticks – digital facsimile at the Linda Hall Library
(1719) Optice – digital facsimile at the Linda Hall Library
(1729) Lectiones opticae – digital facsimile at the Linda Hall Library
(1749) Optices libri tres – digital facsimile at the Linda Hall Library