Calorimetry is the science of measuring the heat of chemical reactions or physical changes. Calorimetry is performed with a calorimeter.
Isothermal microcalorimetry (IMC) is a laboratory method for real-time, continuous measurement of the heat flow rate (μJ/sec = μW) and cumulative amount of heat (J) consumed or produced at essentially constant temperature by a specimen placed in an IMC instrument. Such heat is due to chemical or physical changes taking place in the specimen. The heat flow is proportional to the aggregate rate of changes taking place at a given time. The aggregate heat produced during a given time interval is proportional to the cumulative amount of aggregate changes which have taken place.
IMC is thus a means for dynamic, quantitative evaluation of the rates and energetics of a broad range of rate processes, including biological processes. A rate process is defined here as a physical and/or chemical change whose progress over time can be described either empirically or by a mathematical model (Bibliography: Glasstone, et al. 1941 and Johnson, et al. 1974 and Rate equation).
The simplest use of IMC is detecting that one or more rate processes are taking place in a specimen because heat is being produced or consumed at a rate that is greater than the detection limit of the instrument used. This can be a useful, for example, as a general indicator that a solid or liquid material is not inert but instead is changing at a given temperature. In biological specimens containing a growth medium, appearance over time of a detectable and rising heat flow signal is a simple general indicator of the presence of some type of replicating cells.

However, for most applications it is paramount to know, by some means, what process or processes are being measured by monitoring heat flow. In general this entails first having detailed physical, chemical and biological knowledge of the items placed in an IMC ampoule before it is placed in an IMC instrument for evaluation of heat flow over time. It is also then necessary to analyze the ampoule contents after IMC measurements of heat flow have been made for one or more periods of time. Also, logic-based variations in ampoule contents can be used to identify the specific source or sources of heat flow. When rate process and heat flow relationships have been established, it is then possible to rely directly on the IMC data.
What IMC can measure in practice depends in part on specimen dimensions, and they are necessarily constrained by instrument design. A given commercial instrument typically accepts specimens of up to a fixed diameter and height. Instruments accepting specimens with dimensions of up to ca. 1 or 2 cm in diameter x ca. 5 cm in height are typical. In a given instrument larger specimens of a given type usually produce greater heat flow signals, and this can augment detection and precision.
Frequently, specimens are simple 3 to 20 ml cylindrical ampoules (Fig. 1) containing materials whose rate processes are of interest—e.g. solids, liquids, cultured cells—or any combination of these or other items expected to result in production or consumption of heat. Many useful IMC measurements can be carried out using simple sealed ampoules, and glass ampoules are common since glass is not prone to undergoing heat-producing chemical or physical changes. However, metal or polymeric ampoules are sometimes employed. Also, instrument/ampoule systems are available which allow injection or controlled through-flow of gasses or liquids and/or provide specimen mechanical stirring.
Commercial IMC instruments allow heat flow measurements at temperatures ranging from ca. 15 °C – 150 °C. The range for a given instrument may be somewhat different.
IMC is extremely sensitive – e.g. heat from slow chemical reactions in specimens weighing a few grams, taking place at reactant consumption rates of a few percent per year, can be detected and quantified in a matter of days. Examples include gradual oxidation of polymeric implant materials and shelf life studies of solid pharmaceutical drug formulations (Applications (Solid Materials)).
Also the rate of metabolic heat production of e.g. a few thousand living cells, microorganisms or protozoa in culture in an IMC ampoule can be measured. The amount of such metabolic heat can be correlated (through experimentation) with the number of cells or organisms present. Thus, IMC data can be used to monitor in real time the number of cells or organisms present and the net rate of growth or decline in this number (Applications (Biology and Medicine)).
Although some non-biological applications of IMC are discussed (Applications (Solid Materials)) the present emphasis in this article is on the use of IMC in connection with biological processes (Applications (Biology and Medicine)).