Jack's first power was control over his own density. Initially, he was only able to turn himself into a cloudy, gaseous form. After a while, he learned how to make himself small and dense. Jack's major defenses were his ability to "go cloudy" and escape from people who were physically attacking him, and the "Jack Hammer," in which he dropped onto his enemies in his super-dense form. Several years later, Jack was able to create the molecular density force field first used by his sister Julie as Molecula.
Jack later gained his brother Alex's gravity powers. He could de-gravitize himself and anything he touched, float, and increase gravitational force. Jack modified his powers by developing the "Super-G" punch, in which he used a super-gravitized fist to hit his adversaries. With this tactic, Jack was able to knock out Arclight during the Mutant Massacre. Jack refused to use the wings that Alex had used in order to fly and took the name Counterweight.
Jack then gained the energy powers previously held by Katie and Alex. The energy powers allowed him to disintegrate matter and convert it into stored energy, as well as absorb existing energy directed against him. He could then project this stored energy as explosive spheres (referred to as "power balls"). During this time, he took the name Destroyer.
Jack eventually regained his original powers and took on his original codename of Mass Master.
Along with his siblings, Jack possessed Kymellian healing powers. Usually, he was required to work with his siblings to generate and use this ability; however, he occasionally accessed it on his own.
With his siblings, Jack owned a Kymellian smartship, Friday. The ship acted as an unofficial team advisor and accompanied the Pack on several missions.
Jack wears a costume of unstable molecules created by Friday. The costume exists in an extra-dimensional space known as "Elsewhere" until summoned by voice command (the wearer would say the words "costume on!"). The costume also houses a communicator which is used to communicate with Friday, and was later modified to include a mask. As with all the team's costumes, the pockets of the costume can be used as an access point to Elsewhere itself, where the cartoon-like creatures known simply as "The Tailors" reside in a colorful wonderland of talking dinosaurs, enchanted forests, mad monarchs, surreal architecture, and malleable physical laws.