The smooth movement and also the rest state of an alert human body is achieved by balancing the forces of several antagonistic muscles which are controlled across neural paths by the brain (for directed movement) or sometimes across reflex arcs. In balancing some given force (e.g., holding or pulling up a weight, well within muscular capability) the postcentral gyrus establishes a control loop to achieve this equilibrium or the desired motion. The sensed position of the actuator coupled to the weight is compared by the brain to the intended position (steady or lifted in the example) and the according muscles are tensioned or relaxed to achieve the desired result. If the load changes faster than the current state of this control loop is capable of supplying a suitable adaptive response, the balance cannot be upheld, because the tensioned muscles cannot relax or build up tension fast enough and overshoot in either direction, until the neural control loop manages to take control again. Of course the time to react is limited from below by physiological bounds and also depends on the attention level of the brain: an expected change will be stabilized faster than a sudden drop or increase of load.
To avoid that passengers in transportation lose control over their body motion, thereby endangering their physical integrity, it is not only necessary to limit the maximum acceleration, that is the force, they can safely be exposed to, but also the maximum jerk, since they need time to adapt to even limited stress changes by adjusting their muscle tension, or else suffer conditions such as whiplash. Even where occupant safety is not an issue, excessive jerk may result in an uncomfortable ride on elevators, trams, and the like; so engineers expend considerable design effort to minimize "jerky motion".
Since forces, changing at a suitable rate in time (that is, suitable jerk) are the cause of vibrations, and vibrations significantly impair the quality of transportation, there is good reason to simply minimize jerk in transportation vehicles.
As an everyday example, driving in a car can show effects of acceleration and jerk. More skilled and experienced drivers can accelerate smoothly, but beginners often provide a jerky ride.
Changing gears in an average car, especially with a foot-operated clutch, offers well-known examples: although the accelerating force is limited by engine power, an inexperienced driver lets you experience severe jerk, just because of intermittent force closure over the clutch.
High-powered sports cars offer the feeling of being pressed into the cushioning, but this is the force of the acceleration. Only in the very first moments, when the torque of the engine grows with the rotational speed, the acceleration grows remarkably and a slight whiplash effect is noticeable in the neck, mostly masked by the jerk of gear switching.
In the beginning of an (emergency) braking a body under tonicity whips forward (with respect to the car) to a bigger extent than the achieved acceleration alone accomplishes during the rest of the braking process, when the muscle tension regains control of the body. A collision can do so to an even greater degree, not allowing for a tonicity controlled body at all. Quantitative testing on living humans (and, for some, on animals) runs afoul of ethical concerns, with the effect that cadavers or crash test dummies must be substituted, which, of course, do not show the physiological reactions to jerk caused by an active control loop described above.
A highly reproducible experiment to demonstrate jerk is as follows: Brake a car starting at a modest speed in two different ways:
apply a constant, modest force on the pedal till the car comes to a halt, only then release the pedal;
apply the same, constant, modest force on the pedal, but just before the halt, reduce the force on the pedal, optimally releasing the pedal fully, exactly when the car stops.

The reason for the by far bigger jerk in the first way to brake is a discontinuity of the acceleration, which is initially at a constant value, due to the constant force on the pedal, and drops to zero immediately, when the wheels stop rotating. Note that there would be no jerk if the car started to move backwards with the same acceleration. Every experienced driver knows how to start and how to stop braking with low jerk. See also below in the motion profile, segment 7: Deceleration ramp-down.
For some remarks on how the human perception of various motions is organized in the proprioceptors, the vestibular organ and by visual impressions, and how to deceive it, see the article on motion simulators.