Jerom's main personality trait is his supernatural strength. He calls himself "de sterkste man van het westelijk halfrond, andere helft ook" ("the strongest man of the western hemisphere,and the other half too"). He is able to defeat large groups of people and monsters and can move or destroy buildings with one finger. His eyes are able to produce light and can look through concrete objects. When making contact with electric utensils Jerom is able to produce energy and when he drinks gasoline he can run at car speed. He swims across oceans, can drill himself through the ground  jump over buildings and even into the clouds. His chest is also able to resist bullets, which just bounce off from it. Despite this ability he is still held in control by someone with a gun in some stories. Jerom is also known for his "T-slag" ("T-blow"), which is a type of strike where his opponent is hit, but only falls down knocked out a few seconds later because his brains only realized it then. Jerom can also run faster than sound and even change his own speech balloons into parachutes, if necessary. When he is about to fight extremely violent he deliberately makes a huge dust cloud, asks the readers beforehand to close their eyes or lets the artists cover up the panels with a large curtain.
His efforts seldom tire him. In De Wilde Weldoener ("The Wild Well-Doer"; 1961) he reveals that his eyes always remain shut because "his eyelids are too heavy". So he just peers underneath them. Sometimes he even tries to spare his powers by using only one fist or not actually hitting someone. He just uses makes a feint arm movement and the wind he produces is enough to blow his opponent away. Only when Jerom hasn't eaten yet he tends to feel weaker than usual. His appetite is so large that he eats alarm clocks, drinks a whole bucket full of beer  or even an entire mountain lake
Jerom is in fact so undefeatable that the series' writers often have trouble making the stories interesting, since Jerom can always be used as a deus ex machina to solve all problems. Therefore, he is sometimes sent away on holiday or for work at the start of a story. Halfway the plot he is often temporarily eliminated by poison, hypnosis, magic or a sleeping potion, only to make a triumphant return in the end.