There are two main variants of jump drives commonly portrayed in computer games. The first requires a ship to travel through normal space to a specific jump point. Once at that point, the jump drive is used to move to another jump point. In some examples, such as the Capsule Drive in the computer game Independence War, the ship can travel to any other jump point. Others, such as the Wing Commander series, only allow transit from one jump point to a corresponding exit point (which may or may not allow travel in the opposite direction). The second variant allows a ship to execute a jump from anywhere in normal space and move directly to any other location. This variant is frequently subject to other limitations such as distance from strong gravity wells. Battletech uses this style of jump drive in its jumpships.
With the appearance of computer games, many have used jump drives, including:
The pioneering Elite series uses "hyperspace" jump drives for travel between "planets" (actually, planetary systems; single-planet in the original game, full systems in the sequels). These incorporate features of both listed types; a hyperspace jump can be initiated almost anywhere in-system so long as it is a certain minimum distance from a docking station, planet, etc., but will eject transported ships at roughly the same outer-system location each time, leaving it vulnerable to pirates lurking nearby. Jumps are not absolutely instantaneous, but only take a few seconds each, which must be considered literal as the series makes few other concessions to the vast distances and travel times of deep space (e.g. for sub-light intrasystem travel, Frontier merely provides a low-multiplier "fast forward" option). Elite: Dangerous also features a low-power version of the warp drive allowing to travel at speeds up to a few hundreds of times the speed of light.
Homeworld, released on September 28, 1999. Jump drive is here called Hyperspace drive. Later, it was mentioned in its successors: Homeworld Cataclysm and Homeworld 2.
The Microsoft game "Allegiance" that features jump drive like ripcord technology.
Darkstar One, a computer game released June 16, 2006 in the UK.
Battlestar Galactica, which specifically references the term FTL
Wing Commander series of computer games, movie and novels
The FreeSpace computer game series, worth noting here that ships can use their own jump drives to perform FTL travel within a star system, but need to use "Jump Nodes" to travel the vast distances between stars
Battletech series of games and novels
"Endless Sky" is an open-world space commerce and combat game. In Endless Sky, a jump drive is said to hold matter inside a containment field in a state that cannot exist in the universe. The jump drive, like a standard hyperspace jump in the game, takes 1 day, as opposed to the instantaneous jumps present in other works and games.
Heavy Gear series of games
The Eve Online MMORPG where it allows capital ships, black ops battleships and advanced freighters to travel instantaneously to any beacon deployed by structures or allied ships in a radius of a few light-years, at the cost of fuel and most of the ship's energy. Some of these ships can open jump portals to be used by other ships. By jumping, characters accumulate jump fatigue that increase the recovery period between each jump.
In the game Starmade, the jump drive block allows for a ship to travel to any coordinates within 8 sectors of the drive in 2 seconds flat. No gravity well limitations.
Starlancer PC and Dreamcast video game, which presents a quick jump to another part of a solar system
DarkSpace, an online-only PC game.
The Space-fold Drive of the Macross universe.
The jump drive in the X series of video games.
Unreal Tournament 2004, where starships usually use "jumpgates" to travel in space, but a prototype "jumpship", that is capable of creating its own temporary, small jumpgates, is created.
Mass Effect series supplement relatively slow warp drive-style ship drives with massive ancient "mass relays" providing near-instantaneous travel.
Outer Empires, where a Jump Drive allows players to move in between systems.
FTL: Faster Than Light, where the player's ship is equipped with a jump drive that allows it to jump between "beacons".
Space Engineers update 01.090 adds a jump drive that allows instantaneous travel over relatively large distances- a single unit allows 2000 km, interplanetary distance is roughly that value as well.
Starbound, where player's ship is equipped with the jump drive that will allow travel through the various stars in the game.
Astrogalaxy, where you get an FTL drive module that enables interplanetary travel, and a wormhole generator drive that enables interstellar travel.
Stellaris, where there are two endgame technologies called Jump Drive I, and Psi Jump Drive which allow you to travel anywhere in a large radius almost instantaneously, but it can summon invaders from another dimension called Unbidden.