The Byakugan (白眼, lit. "White Eye", English manga: "Evil Eye"/"All-Seeing Eye") is an eye genetic technique and one of the Three Great Dōjutsu that naturally occurs in members of the Ōtsutsuki clan and its descendants and the Hyuga clan. The Byakugan originated with Kaguya, with her son Hamura inheriting the dōjutsu before he and most of his clan took residence on the moon; only one branch of Hamura's clan remained behind and over many generations became the Hyuga clan. Unlike the Sharingan and Rinnegan which are gained through experience and time, the Byakugan manifest at the moment of the user's birth. While normally lavender-white, pupil-less eyes, Byakugan's activation causes the pupils to become more distinct while the veins near their temples bulge. The Byakugan gives the user a nearly 360-degree field of vision. The user can concentrate his or her chakra in the blind spot to achieve 360-degree awareness. They can see and focus on anything within a certain distance from themselves, the range of which can be extended through training. During Part I of the series, Neji Hyuga is limited to fifty meters; by Part II, he can see objects at least eight-hundred meters away.
The Byakugan can detect and see through anything within its range of sight. In battle, users of the Byakugan can see the flow of chakra within an opponent's body. This enables the user to forcibly release their own chakra through one of the opponent's 361 chakra release points, cutting off the flow of chakra or directly attacking the internal organs. Because this is accomplished through only the slightest amount of physical contact, this style of fighting is named "Gentle Fist" (柔拳, Jūken). Due to the manifold techniques using the Byakugan and the Gentle Fist style, the Hyūga impose an elaborate family hierarchy for security reasons. The Gentle Fist's secret techniques are only allowed to be learned by the clan's "main house", who are protected at all times by members of the "branch houses". Branch house members are also branded with a cursed seal that destroys their Byakugan when they die, preventing enemy ninja from studying their bodies to learn the Byakugan's secrets. In Part II, it is revealed that a Kirigakure ninja, Ao, had the Byakugan of a ninja he defeated transplanted into his right eye. Himawari Uzumaki has her variant of the Byakugan, which appears to function like a Sharingan rather than manifest at her birth.