Kakashi reveals to Naruto that Minato intended to combine the Rasengan with his elemental chakra but was unable to complete the technique. Naruto is able to complete his father's work through the use of shadow clones. In order to perform it, Naruto requires the aid of two shadow clones; he provides the chakra, one clone is responsible for the shape transformation, and the other provides the nature transformation. By manipulating the wind-natured chakra of the Wind Release: Rasengan, Naruto was able to create four large points, causing the Rasengan to take on the appearance of a giant fūma shuriken, with the Rasengan in the center remaining a perfect sphere. The technique gives off a loud screech-like noise during and following formation.
The Rasenshuriken creates countless microscopic wind-blades that severely damage the body on a cellular level. It produces so many individual strikes that even Kakashi Hatake is unable to count them all with his Sharingan. The wind-blades sever all nerve channels in the body, leaving the target unable to move after being struck. They also attack the entire chakra circulatory system, which cannot be repaired by any form of medical ninjutsu.
When Naruto first uses the Rasenshuriken against Kakuzu as a slashing weapon, it did cellular damage to Naruto's arm with Tsunade labeling it a forbidden jutsu and comparing it to poison. But Naruto learns that sage mode heals things much quicker therefore he can use the Rasenshuriken as it will quickly heal his arm. The Rasenshuriken's flaw is removed and the damage is greatly increased to the point of cutting through rocky mountains and momentarily stun beings like Kurama. After receiving Hagoromo's yang chakra, Naruto is able to infuse his Rasenshuriken with the elemental chakra provided by the Tailed Beasts inside him: using Son Gōku's Lava Style with the Rasenshuriken to create Sage Art: Lava Style Rasenshuriken (仙法・熔遁螺旋手裏剣, Senpō: Yōton Rasenshuriken). Naruto can also create eight Shadow Clones to utilize all nine Tailed Beasts' chakra in the Sage Art: Super Tailed Beast Rasenshuriken (仙法・超尾獣螺旋手裏剣, Senpō: Chōbijū Rasenshuriken) attack. In Naruto Shippuden: Ultimate Ninja Storm Revolution, there is a very powerful variation called Tailed Beast Planetary Rasenshuriken.