The main LaPD diagnostic is the movable probe. The relatively low electron temperature makes probe construction straightforward and does not require the use of exotic materials. Probes currently used at the facility include magnetic field probes, Langmuir probes, Mach probes (to measure flow) and many others. Standard probe design also allows external users to bring their own diagnostics with them, if they desire. Each probe is inserted through its own vacuum interlock, which allows probes to be added and removed while the device is in operation.
A 1 Hz rep-rate, coupled with the high reproducibility of the background plasma, allows the rapid collection of enormous datasets. An experiment on LaPD is typically designed to be repeated once per second, for as many hours or days as is necessary to assemble a complete set of observations. This makes it possible to diagnose experiments using a small number of movable probes, in contrast to the large probe arrays used in many other devices.
The entire length of the device is fitted with "ball joints," vacuum-tight angular couplings (invented by a LaPD staff member) which allow probes to be inserted and rotated, both vertically and horizontally. In practice, these are used in conjunction with computer-controlled motorized probe drives to sample "planes" (vertical cross-sections) of the background plasma with whatever probe is desired. Since the only limitation on the amount of data to be taken (number of points in the plane) is the amount of time spent recording shots at 1 Hz, it is possible to assemble large volumetric datasets consisting of many planes at different axial locations.
Visualizations composed from such volumetric measurements can be seen at the LaPD gallery.
Including the ball joints, there are a total of 450 access ports on the machine, many of which are fitted with windows for optical or microwave observation. Other diagnostics at LaPD include a microwave interferometer, fast (3 ns) photography and laser-induced fluorescence.