Every morning a wheeled diesel-powered maintenance vehicle ran across the tracks to check them for debris. When these works are finished, it has to wait before the last turnout. There were two workers on the maintenance vehicle who radioed the line dispatcher for clearance to leave the track but they did not get a response. They were unaware of a test run scheduled that morning which was to be half an hour earlier than usual carrying visitors from associated companies - including employees at Transrapid, workers from a local nursing care company and workers from local utility company RWE.
The maglev train was boarded according to usual routine. The train left the station at 09:43 going for a brake test first. After that it had to wait for clearance from the line dispatcher. The line dispatchers energized the tracks at 09:52 and one line dispatcher radioed the maglev train to proceed. No communication with the maintenance vehicle is recorded. The transrapid used its high acceleration to achieve the 170 km/h that was common for the first test round before trying 450 km/h on the following test rounds.

About 57 seconds after the start of the train at 09:53 an emergency braking is recorded. The maglev train hit the maintenance vehicle less than 0.56 seconds (25 metres) later at a speed of 162 km/h. The lightweight design of the transrapid caused it to dive under the heavy (60 tonne) maintenance vehicle, ripping off the roof of the maglev train. The wreckage went for another 300 meters on the track before coming to a halt.
There were twenty-three fatalities and ten severe injuries. The two-man crew of the maintenance vehicle were among the survivors as they were at the opposite end of the vehicle. They even managed to save three survivors from the Transrapid by removing the bottom panel when they heard them knocking underneath. The maintenance vehicle and the front cars of the maglev train were otherwise destroyed, also killing the train driver on the spot. Two engineers sitting in the rear section of the maglev could escape as well, only three other passengers could be saved later by cutting through the remains of the maglev train. None got off unscathed.