Expendable launch vehicles are designed for one-time use. They usually separate from their payload and disintegrate during atmospheric reentry. In contrast, reusable launch vehicles are designed to be recovered intact and launched again. The Space Shuttle was a part of a launch vehicle with components used for multiple orbital spaceflights. SpaceX has developed a reusable rocket launching system to successfully bring back a part—the first stage—of their Falcon 9 and launch it again (first successful recovery in 2015 and first successful relaunch in March 2017) and Falcon Heavy (first test launch: 6 February 2018) launch vehicles. A fully reusable VTVL design is planned for all parts of the ITS launch vehicle. The low-altitude flight test program of an experimental technology-demonstrator launch vehicle began in 2012, with more extensive high-altitude over-water flight testing planned to begin in mid-2013, and continue on each subsequent Falcon 9 flight. Non-rocket spacelaunch alternatives are progressing. In June 2017, Stratolaunch Systems began ground testing the carrier aircraft component of its air launch to orbit system. The Stratolaunch is the world's largest aircraft, weighing 500,000 pounds and composed of twin fuselages with an overall wingspan of 385 feet. The Spanish company Zero 2 Infinity ( 0II∞ ) is developing another launch system concept, the Blooster, a balloon-borne launcher based on rockoon technology.
Launch vehicles are often classified by the amount of mass they can carry into a particular orbit. For example, a Proton rocket can lift 22,000 kilograms (49,000 lb) into low Earth orbit (LEO). Launch vehicles are also characterized by their number of stages. Rockets with as many as five stages have been successfully launched, and there have been designs for several single-stage-to-orbit vehicles. Additionally, launch vehicles are very often supplied with boosters supplying high early thrust, normally burning with other engines. Boosters allow the remaining engines to be smaller, reducing the burnout mass of later stages to allow larger payloads.
Other frequently reported characteristics of launch vehicles are the launching nation or space agency and the company or consortium manufacturing and launching the vehicle. For example, the European Space Agency is responsible for the Ariane V, and the United Launch Alliance manufactures and launches the Delta IV and Atlas V rockets. Many launch vehicles are considered part of a historical line of vehicles of the same or similar name; e.g., the Atlas V is the latest Atlas rocket.