Scale Relativity aims to unify quantum physics and relativity theory by introducing explicitly the scales of observation in physical equations as characterizing the "state of scale" of the coordinate system. This is made possible by the fundamental relative nature of scales: only scale ratios have a physical meaning, never an absolute scale, in the same way as there exists no absolute velocity, but only velocity differences. The analogy between special relativity and scale relativity can be pushed quite far. Einstein introduced parameters of velocity in the observational referential. The theory implies that similar results as special relativity with velocity should apply with the introduction of scales:
There exists an unreachable observational length-scale, the Planck scale, as there is in special relativity an unreachable speed, the speed of light.
The composition of two scale changes is inferior to the product of these two scales. Similarly, in special relativity, the composition of two speeds is inferior to the sum of those two speeds.
Scale relativity is developed as an extension of Einstein's relativity, and is founded on the same heuristic principle. The core idea is to suppose the existence of trajectories varying according to scale transformations. Those trajectories are not rectifiable, i.e. they are fractal. The apparently disordered motions of particles at the quantum scale are described in terms of motions following fractal geodesics. The key mathematical tool used in the theory are fractals, which Nottale also enriched to be able to model fractal space-time. The theory leads to fundamental results, as well as precise predictions, many of which have been verified with great precision.
Among the theoretical predictions of scale relativity are:
Derivation of postulates of quantum mechanics.
Among the applied predictions of scale relativity to date:
Prediction of the location of exoplanets
Explanation of observed large-scale structures, such as the Titius Bode observation.
Relation between mass and charge of the electron
A letter to the New Scientist has suggested that the theory needs closer critical attention, coverage and discussion from the scientific community:

"I do not understand why Nottale's theory has not been given wider coverage or discussion. If he is wrong it needs debunking, if he is right he deserves a Nobel prize."