A Legion Flight Ring is controlled by mental command, and like a Green Power Ring, it can be willed for varying effects. For example, because of Dream Girl's strong will, she has used the Flight Ring to move other objects by negating the gravity around it. Its main function, however, is to allow its wearer to fly. In addition, the ring's circuitry allows for communication between Legionnaires and Legion Headquarters, can project light like a flash light, and can be used to lift people and objects.
The ring's mental control feature affords Legion members some protection against outside mental possession, but it can also make them more vulnerable to subtler mental influences such as hypnosis. This feature once prevented Wildfire from possessing Legionnaires when he was in his energy form and needed to warn them of a deadly threat. On another occasion, an unknown adversary tricked several Legionnaires into believing they were battling a "Tulvanian witch wolf" using a hypnotic suggestion transmitted through their Flight Rings and nearly killed them.
Another function of the Legion Flight Ring is to send out a distress call. If a Legionnaire rotates the "L" symbol 45 degrees, the ring will send out a distress message that will be received by other Legionnaires and the Mission Monitor Board at Legion Headquarters.
Brainiac 5 has modified the functions of a ring specific to each Legionnaire. For example, Colossal Boy's ring will enlarge with him, and Shrinking Violet's will shrink with her. Other examples of this include the Legion Flight Ring being able to "Duplicate" with Duplicate Damsel, resist temperature extremes around Sun Boy and Polar Boy and handle the increased mass of Blok as he originally has to wear three rings due to his massive size. Another modification he had recently made, was to Earth-Man's Legion Flight Ring, in order to keep him on a short leash and alter his morality.
A Legion Flight Ring is also used for security purposes. Only someone with a Legion Flight Ring is allowed to use certain equipment, including the Legion Cruiser.
In certain alternate universe versions of the Legion, it has other uses as well. Environmental protection is an added benefit for the Earth-Prime Legionnaires, for example. The Earth-0 and Earth-247 Legionnaires use Legion Transuits instead.