This thought experiment, subsequently conducted in the lab, is an example of interaction-free measurement (IFM). IFM is the detection of the property of an object or its presence without any physical interaction between the observer and the object. Obtaining information from an object in such a manner is paradoxical.
The bomb tester works by employing an interferometer. When a photon is fired into the device, it encounters a half-silvered mirror positioned so as reflect the photon at a ninety-degree angle. There is a 50-50 chance it will be reflected or pass through. Due to the quantum properties of the photon, it both passes through the mirror and is reflected off of it.
Now, the same photon is moving through two different parts of the device. The photon that passed through the mirror is now on the "lower path". It may or may not encounter a bomb, which is designed to explode if it encounters a single photon. The photon that was reflected off the mirror is now on the "upper path". Both photons next encounter a normal mirror. The lower-path photon is reflected ninety-degrees upward (if it did not detect a bomb). The upper-path photon is reflected back ninety degrees so that it is returned to its original trajectory.
If the lower-path photon did not detect a bomb, it will arrive at a second half-silvered mirror at the same time as the upper-path photon. This will result in the single photon interfering with itself.
A pair of detectors are positioned beyond the mirror in such a way that the photon's superposition collapses and the photon is observed to have either been on the upper path or the lower path, but not both. If the upper-path detector encounters the photon, then the photon "actually" took the upper path and no measurement was made of whether or not there was a bomb on the lower path. If, however, the lower-path detector encounters a photon, it can be determined that fifty percent of the time, there is a bomb on the lower path--without actually encountering it.
According to Hugh Everett's Many-worlds interpretation of quantum physics, there is no paradox. The information was obtained from a parallel universe wherein the encounter between the lower-path photon and the bomb actually did occur. Upon detecting the photon in the end, the device is able to utilize the superposition of the photon to obtain information about the lower path, despite the fact that factually it did not take the lower path.