The quadriceps femoris muscle group and rectus femoris are both responsible for knee extension while the rectus femoris also contributes to flexion at the hip. Electromyographic (EMG) data has shown both to be active in anticipation of and during stance phase to support the body. The rectus femoris is also active in mid-swing phase as a result of its hip flexor capabilities. The major antagonist muscles to the quad set are the gluteal muscles (hip extension) and the hamstrings (hip extension and knee flexion). The hamstring muscles activate in mid-swing phase to help decelerate the lower leg. Both groups are active in late swing phase to begin to extend the hip as well as being active in the first half of the stance phase to perform the same action. Lower leg muscles acting on the ankle are the dorsiflexors (tibialis anterior) and plantarflexors (gastrocnemius and soleus). The gastrocnemius/soleus is active in the last part of swing phase to prepare for foot strike and remain active through stance until just before toe-off in order to propel the body forward. The tibialis anterior is active during swing to allow ground clearance and undergoes eccentric lengthening during stance to help control deceleration and lowering.
During incline running increases in activation of the rectus femoris and gastrocnemius were noted by Cai. Yokozawa found incline running to produce increased activation in the vasti group, hamstrings, iliopsoas, and adductors. Neither of these two provided timing on what point of gait these increases occurred. Swanson also recorded EMG data, but compared differences before foot strike (swing phase) and after foot strike (stance phase) as well as on a wider range of muscles. Results showed significant increases in activation of tibialis anterior, gastrocnemius, soleus, rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, medial hamstring, biceps femoris, and gluteus maximus before foot strike. Following foot strike increases were seen in all muscles with the exception of the tibialis anterior and medial hamstring.