The cartridges for lever action rifles have a wide variety of calibres, bullet shapes and powder loads, but they fall into two basic categories: Low-pressure cartridges with rounded bullets, and high-pressure cartridges with aerodynamic pointed ("spitzer") bullets.
Some lever actions are not as strong as bolt-action or semi-automatic rifle actions. The weaker actions utilize low- and medium-pressure cartridges, somewhat similar to high-powered pistol ammunition. To increase the bullet's energy at the relatively low velocities, these often have larger, heavier bullets than other types of rifles. The most common cartridge is the .30-30, introduced by Winchester with the Model 1894. Other common cartridges include: .38 Special/.357 Magnum, .44 Special/.44 Magnum, .41 Magnum, .444 Marlin, .45-70, .45 Colt, .32-20 Winchester, .35 Remington, .308 Marlin Express, .22 calibre rimfire, and .300 Savage. There is dispute about which of these cartridges can safely be used to hunt large game or large predators. Even in the largest calibres, the low velocities give these cartridges much lower energies than Elephant gun cartridges with comparable calibres. However, even the smallest cartridges fit lightweight, handy rifles that can be excellent for hunting small herbivores, pest control and personal defense.
Some stronger, larger pistols (usually revolvers) also accept some of these cartridges, permitting use of the same ammunition in both a pistol and rifle. The rifle's longer barrel and better accuracy permits higher velocities, longer ranges and a wider selection of game. A pistol provides extra security.
Some of these cartridges (e.g. the .45-70) are developmental descendants of very early black-powder metallic cartridges. When metallic cartridges and lever-actions were first invented, very small, portable kits were developed for hand-reloading and bullet-molding (so called "cowboy reloading kits"). These kits are still available for most low-pressure lever-action cartridges.
Stronger lever actions, such as the action of the Marlin Model 1894 can utilize high-pressure cartridges. Lever-action designs with strong, rotary locking bolts (such as the Browning BLR with seven locking lugs) safely use very high-powered cartridges like the 300 Winchester mag, 300 WSM and 7 MM Remington magnum. Tilting block designs such as the Savage Model 99 are also strong enough to handle high pressures.
Many lever actions have a tubular magazine under the barrel. To operate safely, cartridges for these have bullets with rounded tips, and some use rim-fire primers rather than center-fire primers. The safety problem is that long-range aerodynamic supersonic bullets are pointed. In a tubular magazine the points can accidentally fire center-fire cartridges. A related problem is that some pointed bullets have fragile tips, and can be damaged in a tubular magazine. So, some lever actions such as the Savage Model 99 can be fed from either box or rotary magazines. The Winchester Model 1895 also uses a box magazine, and is chambered for .30-06 and other powerful military cartridges. More recently, spitzer bullets with elastomeric tips have been developed.
Lever-action shotguns such as the Winchester Model 1887 were chambered in 10 or 12-gauge black powder shotgun shells, whereas the Model 1901 was chambered for 10 gauge smokeless shotshells. Modern reproductions are chambered for 12 gauge smokeless shells, while the Winchester Model 9410 shotgun is available in .410 bore.