While lever-action rifles were (and are) popular with hunters and sporting shooters, they were not widely accepted by the military. One significant reason for this was that it is harder to fire a lever-action from the prone position (compared to a straight-pull or rotating-bolt bolt-action rifle), and while possessing a greater rate of fire (contemporary Winchester advertisements claimed their rifles could fire 2 shots a second) than bolt-action rifles, lever-action firearms are also generally fed from a tubular magazine as did most of the bolt actions of that time which limits the type of ammunition that can be used in them. Pointed centerfire spitzer bullets, for example, can cause explosions in a tubular magazine, as the point of each cartridge's projectile rests on the primer of the next cartridge in the magazine (elastomer-tipped Hornady LEVERevolution ammunition overcomes this problem). The tubular magazine may also have a negative impact on the harmonics of the barrel, which limits the theoretical accuracy of the rifle. A tubular magazine under the barrel also pushes the center of gravity forward, which alters the balance of the rifle in ways that are desirable for shooting off hand from a standing position to some shooters. However, there are some lever rifles—such as the Winchester Model 1895, which saw service with the Russian Army in World War I—that use a box magazine. Furthermore, many of the newer lever-action rifles are capable of shooting groups smaller than 1 minute of angle, making them equal to the accuracy of most modern bolt-action rifles as than in the past.

Another explanation for the lack of widespread use of lever action designs stems from the initial inability to fire high-pressure cartridges. Safe operation could only be carried out by using low-pressure cartridges in the toggle-lock lever action rifles such as the Henry rifle and the following Winchester Model 1866, Model 73 and Model 76 (which was used by the mounted police of Canada). The new lever action designs, notably the Winchester Model 1886, Model 92 Model 94 and the Model 1895 (in 7.62x54R, a Russian military cartridge), with a strong locking-block action designed by John Moses Browning, were capable of firing higher pressure cartridges. These rifles became available in the late 19th century, too expensive to manufacture, militaries worldwide had put cheap bolt action rifles into service and were unwilling to invest into producing a lever action rifle after having done with an inexpensive bolt action design.
Due to the higher rate of fire and shorter overall length than most bolt-action rifles, lever-actions have remained popular to this day for sporting use, especially short- and medium-range hunting in forests, scrub, or bushland. Lever-action firearms have also been used in some quantity by prison guards in the United States, as well as by wildlife authorities/game wardens in many parts of the world.
An additional advantage over typical bolt-action rifles is the lack of handedness: lever-actions like pump-actions are frequently recommended as ambidextrous in sporting guidebooks.