Over the decades huge number of precipitation reactions have been used to study the phenomenon, and it seems quite general. Chromates, metal hydroxides, carbonates, and sulfides, formed with lead, copper, silver, mercury and cobalt salts are sometimes favored by investigators, perhaps because of the pretty, colored precipitates formed.
The gels used are usually gelatin, agar or silicic acid gel.
The concentration ranges over which the rings form in a given gel for a precipitating system can usually be found for any system by a little systematic empirical experimentation in a few hours. Often the concentration of the component in the agar gel should be substantially less concentrated (perhaps an order of magnitude or more) than the one placed on top of the gel.
The first feature usually noted is that the bands which form farther away from the liquid-gel interface are generally farther apart. Some investigators measure this distance and report in some systems, at least, a systematic formula for the distance that they form at. The most frequent observation is that the distance apart that the rings form is proportional to the distance from the liquid-gel interface. This is by no means universal, however, and sometimes they form at essentially random, irreproducible distances.
Another feature often noted is that the bands themselves do not move with time, but rather form in place and stay there.
For very many systems the precipitate that forms is not the fine coagulant or flocs seen on mixing the two solutions in the absence of the gel, but rather coarse, crystalline dispersions. Sometimes the crystals are well separated from one another, and only a few form in each band.
The precipitate that forms a band is not always a binary insoluble compound, but may be even a pure metal. Water glass of density 1.06 made acidic by sufficient acetic acid to make it gel, with 0.05 N copper sulfate in it, covered by a 1 percent solution of hydroxylamine hydrochloride produces large tetrahedrons of metallic copper in the bands.
It is not possible to make any general statement of the effect of the composition of the gel. A system that forms nicely for one set of components, might fail altogether and require a different set of conditions if the gel is switched, say, from agar to gelatin. The essential feature of the gel required is that thermal convection in the tube be prevented altogether.
Most systems will form rings in the absence of the gelling system if the experiment is carried out in a capillary, where convection does not disturb their formation. In fact, the system does not have to even be liquid. A tube plugged with cotton with a little ammonium hydroxide at one end, and a solution of hydrochloric acid at the other will show rings of deposited ammonium chloride where the two gases meet, if the conditions are chosen correctly. Ring formation has also been observed in solid glasses containing a reducible species. For example, bands of silver have been generated by immersing silicate glass in molten AgNO3 for extended periods of time (Pask and Parmelee, 1943).