The techniques mentioned above for SONET and WDM networks can also be applied to mesh network architectures provided there are ring decompositions for the mesh architectures; and use well defined protection-switching schemes to restore service when a failure occurs. The three most notable ring-based protection techniques for mesh networks are ring covers, cycle double covers and p-cycles (pre-configured protection cycles).
The main goal of the ring cover technique is to find a set of rings that covers all the network links and then use these rings to protect the network against failures. Some network links in the ring cover might get used in more than one ring which can cause additional redundancy in the network and because of this reason, scaling down redundancy is the primary focus of this technique.
The cycle double covers technique provides one protection fiber for each working fiber (like in SONET rings) keeping 100% redundancy. This technique was initially proposed to remove the additional redundancy issue caused by the ring cover scheme.
The p-cycle technique is based on the property of a ring to protect not only its own links, but also any possible links connecting two non-adjacent ring nodes called chordal links. By doing this, p-cycles reduce the redundancy required to protect a mesh network against link failure. There are two types of p-cycles namely link p-cycles and node p-cycles. Link p-cycles protect all channels on a link whereas a node p-cycle protects all the connections traversing a node.
One of the best features of p-cycles is its ability to allow savings in spare resources and they are also recognized to be the most efficient protection structures as for capacity minimization. However, p- cycle planning is an NP-hard problem and is not scalable.
Another technique called the generalized loopback technique can be included under ring-based approaches. Although it is not strictly considered as one of the mesh-based ring protection techniques, its usage of a loopback operation is similar to the APS operation in rings to switch the signal from working to the redundant capacity.