January 14 — A crowded city bus plunges into the Nile in Cairo, Egypt, killing 39 people and injuring 24.
January 19 — A bus plunges into a river after losing control on a curvy road in Punjab, India, killing 29 people and injuring 12.
February 28 – 9 people killed on the spot and 36 injured when two buses owned and managed by Rural Transit Inc. of Cagayan de Oro City, Philippines skidded and smashed each other at Barangay Tubigan, Initao, Misamis Orinetal.
10 March — 3 people killed and 60 injured in 160 vehicle collision on the M42 motorway due to fog.
March 24 — A Seoul bound passenger train smashed into packed local bus, where flipped a vehicle onto railroad side at Namwon, Jeollabuk-do, South Korea, killing fourteen people and injuring twenty.
May 8 — 70 people heading to a wedding were killed when a truck plunged into a gorge in Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh.
August 31 — Diana, Princess of Wales was killed in a Paris underpass along with 2 other passengers.
October 13 — Les Éboulements bus crash in Quebec, Canada, results in 44 deaths when a bus plunges into a ravine, the worst bus crash in Canadian history.
October 24 — 48 people, most of whom were university students, killed in a collision of an empty gasoline tanker truck and a passenger bus in Karapınar on Konya-Ereğli motorway. The passengers were trapped in the bus when both vehicles got aflame. The accident led to wide debate on fire-safety standards of passenger buses.
October 25 — A bus smashed into a carrying gasoline tanker truck at Tugela River, Port Shepstone, South Africa. This bus carrying Inkatha Freedom Party devotees and members. At least 33 people killed.
November 6 — A passenger train crashes into a bus in Holguín Province, Cuba, killing at least 56 people.
November 19 — An overloaded school bus skidded of a bridge and plunged into the Yamuna River near the outskirts of New Delhi, India. The accident resulted in 29 deaths and injuries to around 60 passengers.
November 27 — At least 34 people drowned when their bus fell into a canal in Karnataka.
December 8 — Twenty-two people were killed when a lorry collided with a minibus in central Rwanda.