Galileo Galilei uses rolling balls to disprove the Aristotelian theory of motion (1602–07)
Otto von Guericke demonstrates atmospheric pressure using Magdeburg hemispheres (1654)
Robert Boyle shows that the volume of a given amount of gas is inversely related to the pressure upon it (1660)
Benjamin Franklin beginning in 1747 describes experiments in letters to Peter Collinson demonstrating electrical principles which were published in a book called Experiments and Observations on Electricity.
Alessandro Volta constructs a new source of electricity, the electrical battery (1796)
Henry Cavendish's torsion bar experiment measures the force of gravity in a laboratory (1798)
Thomas Young shows that light is a wave in his double-slit experiment (c. 1805), extended in the 20th century to show it is a particle at the same time
Hans Christian Ørsted discovers the connection of electricity and magnetism by experiments involving a compass and electric circuits (1820)
Michael Faraday discovers magnetic induction in an experiment with a closed ring of soft iron, with two windings of wire (1831)
James Prescott Joule demonstrates the mechanical equivalent of heat, an important step in the development of thermodynamics (1834)
Christian Doppler arranges to have trumpets played from a passing train. The ground-observed pitch was higher than that played when the train was approaching then lower than that played as the train passed and moved away, demonstrating the Doppler effect (1845)
Léon Foucault's namesake Foucault pendulum is first exhibited. It demonstrates the Coriolis effect and the rotation of the Earth (1851)
Edwin Hall discovers a voltage across a conductor with a transverse applied magnetic field, the Hall effect (1879)
Michelson–Morley experiment exposes weaknesses of the prevailing variant of the theory of luminiferous aether (1887)
Heinrich Hertz demonstrates free space electromagnetic waves, predicted by Maxwell's equations, with a simple dipole antenna and spark gap oscillator (1887)
Guglielmo Marconi demonstrates that radio signals can travel between two points separated by an obstacle. Marconi's servant is behind a hill 3 kilometers away and fires his rifle upon receiving the signals (1895).
J. J. Thomson's cathode ray tube experiments (discovers the electron and its negative charge) (1897)
Loránd Eötvös publishes the result of the second series of experiments, clearly demonstrating that inertial and gravitational mass are one and the same. (1909)
Robert Millikan's oil-drop experiment, which suggests that electric charge occurs as quanta (whole units), (1909)
Heike Kamerlingh Onnes demonstrates superconductivity (1911)
Ernest Rutherford's gold foil experiment demonstrated that the positive charge and mass of an atom is concentrated in a small, central atomic nucleus, disproving the then-popular plum pudding model of the atom (1911)

Arthur Eddington leads an expedition to the island of Principe to observe a total solar eclipse (gravitational lensing). This allows for an observation of the bending of starlight under gravity, a prediction of Albert Einstein's theory of relativity. It was confirmed (although it was later shown that the margin of error was as great as the observed bending) (1919)
Otto Stern and Walther Gerlach conduct the Stern–Gerlach experiment, which demonstrates particle spin (1920)
Enrico Fermi and his team in Rome achieved a nuclear reaction (1934, although the results were not understood until 1938, when nuclear fission was discovered by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann)
Enrico Fermi and Leó Szilárd build the first critical nuclear reactor (1942)
John Bardeen and Walter Brattain fabricate the first working transistor (1947)
Chien-Shiung Wu leads the team that disproves the conservation of parity in the Wu experiment (1956)
Clyde L. Cowan and Frederick Reines confirm the existence of the neutrino in the neutrino experiment (1955)
The Scout rocket experiment confirms the time dilation effect of gravity. (1976)
Alain Aspect performs the Bell test experiments in the 1980s.
Eric A. Cornell and Carl E. Wieman synthesize Bose–Einstein condensate at the University of Colorado at Boulder (1995)
Cockcroft–Walton generator