This is a list of (some of) the researchers in quantum gravity.
Jan Ambjørn: Expert on dynamical triangulations who helped develop the causal dynamical triangulations approach to quantum gravity.
Giovanni Amelino-Camelia: Physicist who developed the idea of doubly special relativity, and founded Quantum-Gravity phenomenology.
Abhay Ashtekar: Inventor of the Ashtekar variables, one of the founders of loop quantum gravity.
John Baez: Mathematical physicist who introduced the notion of spin foam in loop quantum gravity (a term originally introduced by Wheeler).
Julian Barbour: Philosopher and author of The End of Time, Absolute or Relative Motion?: The Discovery of Dynamics.
John W. Barrett: Mathematical physicist who helped develop the Barrett–Crane model of quantum gravity.
Martin Bojowald: Physicist who developed the application of loop quantum gravity to cosmology.
Steve Carlip: Expert on 3-dimensional quantum gravity.
Louis Crane: Mathematician who helped develop the Barrett–Crane model of quantum gravity.
Bianca Dittrich: Mathematical physicist known for her contributions to loop quantum gravity and spin foam models, currently working on coarse-graining of spin foams.
Fay Dowker: Physicist working on causal sets as well as the interpretation of quantum mechanics.
David Finkelstein: Physicist who has contributed much quantum relativity and the logical foundations of QR.
Rodolfo Gambini: Physicist who helped introduce loop quantum gravity; coauthor of Loops, Knots, Gauge Theories and Quantum Gravity.
Gary Gibbons: Physicist who has done important work on black holes.
Brian Greene: Physicist who is considered one of the world's foremost string theorists.
James Hartle: Physicist who helped develop the Hartle-Hawking wavefunction for the universe.
Stephen Hawking: Leading physicist, expert on black holes and discoverer of Hawking radiation who helped develop the Hartle-Hawking wavefunction for the universe.
Laurent Freidel: Mathematical physicist known for his contributions to loop quantum gravity and spin foam models, in particular the Freidel-Krasnov model.
Christopher Isham: Physicist who focuses on conceptual problems in quantum gravity.
Ted Jacobson: Physicist who helped develop loop quantum gravity.
Michio Kaku: Physicist one of the foremost leading String theorist and also known for the Popular Science.
Renate Loll: Physicist who worked on loop quantum gravity and more recently helped develop the causal dynamical triangulations approach to quantum gravity.
Fotini Markopoulou-Kalamara: Physicist who works on loop quantum gravity and spin network models that take causality into account.
Roger Penrose: Mathematical physicist who invented spin networks and twistor theory.
Jorge Pullin: Physicist who helped develop loop quantum gravity, co-author of Loops, Knots, Gauge Theories and Quantum Gravity.
Carlo Rovelli: One of the founders and major contributors to loop quantum gravity.
Lee Smolin: One of the founders and major contributors to loop quantum gravity.
Rafael Sorkin: Physicist, primary proponent of the causal set approach to quantum gravity.
Andrew Strominger: Physicist who works on string theory.
Leonard Susskind: Leading physicist, who is considered to be one of the three fathers of string theory.
Frank J. Tipler: Mathematical physicist who incorporates quantum gravity into his ideas of a Judeo-Christian God.
Bill Unruh: Canadian physicist engaged in the study of semiclassical gravity and responsible for the discovery of the so-called Unruh effect.
Cumrun Vafa: Leading physicist, developer of F-theory, known for Vafa-Witten theorem and Gopakumar-Vafa conjecture.
Robert Wald: Leading physicist in the field of quantum field theory in curved spacetime.
Anzhong Wang: Physicist, major contributor to Horava-Lifshitz gravity; String theory and applications to cosmology.
Paul S. Wesson: Physicist, cosmologist and writer, known as founder of the "Space-time Consortium" and his work on Kaluza-Klein theory.
Edward Witten: Leading mathematical physicist, does research in string theory and M-theory.