Voice Actor: Kevin Michael Richardson
Kangorr is an original character to the animated series who has never appeared in the comic books. Kangorr's real name is never mentioned, and much of his backstory is never brought up in the series—-which puts Kangorr across as just another juvenile delinquent gangbanger, but with some common sense, making him into one of the more formidable Bang-Babies in the series. Kangorr was another of the victims of the Bang Baby gas incident at the docks. A Jamaican American in his late teens, Kangorr speaks with a Jamaican accent, and Jamaican music starts to play whenever he shows up or starts a fight. According to the episode "Gear", Kangorr had done time in Juvenile hall with Ivan/Ebon in the time back before the Big-Bang.
Kangorr’s exposure and reaction to the Big Bang gas has super-developed his lower body, especially his feet; the bone and muscle mass of Kangorr's legs and feet is noticeably larger than his upper body, endowing him with incredible lower body strength and giving rise to his nom-de-crime. Kangorr prefers to get around by jumping rather than by walking, (probably because of his big feet keep getting in the way of each other due to their size.) In battle, Kangorr typically leaps or cartwheels into action; his kicks are powerful enough to smash stone and concrete with one hit.
Aside from being the first villain featured in the intro for season two—Kangorr makes his first appearance in The Big Leagues. Kangorr, along with Hot-Streak, Talon, Shiv, under the leadership of The Joker formed up a new team in Dakota. He is first seen when Ferret's gag is taken off and the members of The Joker's crew are revealed. Kangorr uses his feet later on to break into the Dakota Bank in a heist along with the other Bang Babies in The Joker's crew. Kangorr is arrested at the end of the episode, but comes back to make his second appearance in season 2 in "Static Shaq" as a part of The Rough Pack. Only to get a taste of his own medicine by Shaq.
Kangorr was the first known Bang Baby to be seen cured by Dr. Todd’s aerosol Bang Baby cure at the end of the series.