Automatic lockers lock and unlock automatically with no direct input from the driver. Some automatic locking differential designs ensure that engine power is always transmitted to both wheels, regardless of traction conditions, and will "unlock" only when one wheel is required to spin faster than the other during cornering. These would be more correctly termed "automatic unlocking" differentials, because their at-rest position is locked. They will never allow either wheel to spin slower than the differential carrier or axle as a whole, but will permit a wheel to be over-driven faster than the carrier speed. The most common example of this type would be the famous "Detroit Locker," made by Eaton Corporation, also known as the "Detroit No-Spin," which replaces the entire differential carrier assembly. Others, sometimes referred to as "lunchbox lockers," employ the stock differential carrier and replace only the internal spider gears and shafts with interlocking plates. Both types of automatic lockers will allow for a degree of differential wheel speed while turning corners in conditions of equal traction, but will otherwise lock both axle shafts together when traction conditions demand it.
Pros: Automatic action, no driver interaction necessary, no stopping for (dis-) engagement necessary, continuous driving even in unforeseen road condition changes
Cons: Increased tire wear and noticeable impact on driving behavior. During cornering, which half-axle is uncoupled is dependent on torque direction applied by the driveline. When the torque direction is reversed, the speed of the driveline is suddenly forced to change from the inner to outer axle, accompanied by tire chirping and a large jerk. During cornering, the automatic locker is characterized by heavy understeer which transitions instantly to power oversteer when traction is exceeded.
Some other automatic lockers operate as an open differential until wheel slip is encountered and then they lock up. This style generally uses an internal governor to monitor vehicle speed and wheel slip. An example of this is the Eaton Automatic Locking Differential (ALD), or Eaton Automatic Differential Lock (ADL), developed by the Eaton Corporation and introduced in 1973 for GM's Rounded-Line C/K Series pickups and utilities. The Eaton ADL is sometimes incorrectly called the "Gov-Lok", despite neither GM nor Eaton ever calling it by that name. "Gov-Lok" is rather an unofficial name of unknown origin that gained popularity over the years. Both Eaton and GM do not know where the name came from, and Eaton has made several unsuccessful attempts in the past to debunk the Gov-Lok name. An updated version of the old Eaton ADL design is still available from Eaton, now known as the Eaton mLocker mechanical differential lock.
Some other automatic lockers operate as an open differential until high torque is applied and then they lock up. This style generally uses internal gears systems with very high friction. An example of this is the ZF "sliding pins and cams" available for use in early Volkswagens.