High-quality locks may be more vulnerable to bumping unless they employ specific countermeasures. More precise manufacturing tolerances within the cylinder make bumping easier because the mechanical tolerances of the lock are smaller, which means there is less loss of force in other directions and mostly pins move more freely and smoothly. Locks made of hardened steel are more vulnerable because they are less prone to damage during the bumping process that might cause a cheaper lock to jam.
In the United Kingdom, the Government has legislated a British Standard TS007 Kitemark which benchmarks the effectiveness of bumping at 1-star level and 3-star level. The former implies a minimum bump time of 1 minute while the latter offers much greater protection at a minimum bump time of 10 minutes.
Locks having security pins (e.g. spool or mushroom pins)—even when combined with a regular tumbler mechanism—generally make bumping somewhat more difficult but not impossible.
Because a bump key must only have the same blank profile as the lock it is made to open, restricted or registered key profiles are not any safer from bumping. While the correct key blanks cannot be obtained legally without permission or registration with relevant locksmith associations, regular keys can be filed down to act as bump keys.
Locks that have trap pins that engage when a pin does not support them will jam a lock's cylinder. Another countermeasure is shallow drilling, in which one or more of the pin stacks is drilled slightly shallower than the others. If an attempt is made on a lock that has shallow drilled pin stacks, the bump key will be unable to bump the shallow drilled pins because they are too high for the bump key to engage.
Locks that only use programmable side bars and not top pins are bump proof. BiLock is an example of this technology. Many bump-resistant locks are available which cannot be easily opened through the lock bumping method.
Time locks, combination locks, electronic locks, electromagnetic locks, and locks using rotating disks, such as disc tumbler locks, are inherently invulnerable to this attack, since their mechanism does not contain springs. However, some electronic locks feature a key backup that is susceptible to bumping. Warded locks are not vulnerable to bumping, but they are vulnerable to a similar attack called a skeleton key, which is also a filed-down key.
Changing the spring tension can help reduce bumping. A few sources inside the industry offer stronger top springs for conventional pinned locks. Changing one or two top springs to a firmer spring changes the ricochet tuning of the top pins, making it hard to bump.