Loop quantum gravity (LQG) is a theory of quantum gravity, merging quantum mechanics and general relativity. Its goal unifies gravity in a common theoretical framework with the other three fundamental forces of nature, beginning with relativity and adding quantum features. It competes with string theory that begins with quantum field theory and adds gravity.
From the point of view of Albert Einstein's theory, all attempts to treat gravity like one more quantum force on par with electromagnetism and the nuclear forces have failed. According to Einstein, gravity is not a force – it is a property of space-time itself. Loop quantum gravity is an attempt to develop a quantum theory of gravity based directly on Einstein's geometric formulation.
To do this, in LQG theory space and time are quantized, analogously to the way quantities like energy and momentum are quantized in quantum mechanics. The theory gives a physical picture of spacetime where space and time are granular and discrete directly because of quantization just like photons in the quantum theory of electromagnetism and the discrete energy levels of atoms. Distance exists with a minimum.
Space's structure prefers an extremely fine fabric or network woven of finite loops. These networks of loops are called spin networks. The evolution of a spin network, or spin foam, has Planck length, that is approximately 10−35 metres. Therefore, scales smaller than the Planck scale do not exist. Consequently, not just matter, but space itself, prefers an atomic structure.
The vast areas of research developed in several directions that involves about 30 research groups worldwide. They all share the basic physical assumptions and the mathematical description of quantum space. Research follows two directions: the more traditional canonical loop quantum gravity, and the newer covariant loop quantum gravity, called spin foam theory.
Physical consequences of the theory procedes in several directions. The most well-developed applies to cosmology, called loop quantum cosmology (LQC), the study of the early universe and the physics of the Big Bang. Its greatest consequence sees the evolution of the universe continuing beyond the Big Bang called the Big Bounce.