Due to the modern accessibility to accurate timing devices, high resolution digital cameras, GPS receivers, powerful computers and near instantaneous communication, it has become possible for amateur astronomers to make high accuracy measurements of the lunar distance.
On May 23, 2007 digital photographs of the Moon during a near-occultation of Regulus were taken from two locations, in Greece and England. By measuring the parallax between the moon and the chosen background star, the lunar distance was calculated.
A more ambitious project called the "Aristarchus Campaign" was conducted during the lunar eclipse of 15 April 2014. During this event, participants were invited to record a series of 5 digital photographs from moonrise through culmination - the point of greatest altitude. The method took advantage of the fact that the Moon is actually closest to an observer when it is at its highest point in the sky, compared to when it is on the horizon. Although it appears that the Moon is biggest when it is near the horizon, the opposite is true. This phenomenon is known as the moon illusion. The reason for the change in distance results from the fact that the distance from the center of the Moon to the center of Earth is nearly constant throughout the night, but an observer on the surface of Earth is actually 1 Earth radius from the center of Earth. This offset brings them closest to the Moon when it is overhead.
Modern cameras have now reached the resolution level capable of capturing the Moon with a precision enough to perceive and more importantly to measure this tiny variation in apparent size. The results of this experiment were calculated as LD = 60.51+3.91
−4.19 R⊕. The accepted value for that night was 60.61, which implied a 3% accuracy. The benefit of this method is that the only measuring equipment needed is a modern digital camera (equipped with an accurate clock, and GPS receiver).
Other experimental methods of measuring the lunar distance that can be performed by amateur astronomers involve:
Taking pictures of the Moon before it enters into the penumbra and after it is completely eclipsed.
Measuring, as precise as possible, the time of the eclipse contacts.
Taking good pictures of the partial eclipse when the shape and size of the Earth shadow is clearly visible.
Taking a picture of the Moon including in the same field of view, Spica and Mars - from various locations.