Negotiations between JSC and Bell Aerosystems for three LLTV’s, an improved training version of the LLRV, were initiated in October 1966 and a $5.9 million contract for three vehicles was finally signed in March 1967. In June 1968, the first vehicle was delivered by Bell to Ellington to begin its ground and flight testing by JSC’s Aircraft Operations Division (AOD). AOD’s head, Joe Algranti, was the principal test pilot for its first flight in August 1968. Flight testing continued until December 8 when control was lost by Algranti during a flight to expand the vehicle’s speed envelope. He managed to eject just three-fifths of a second before the vehicle hit the ground, the close call believed to be as a result of his attempt to regain control.
The accident investigation found that the ground controllers had elected not to monitor in real time the attitude thrusters that controlled the vehicle’s yaw motion, and, at the velocity Algranti was flying, the thrusters had been overpowered by the LLTV’s aerodynamic forces, causing Algranti to lose control. Because of the LLRV and LLTV tight cost constraints, no wind tunnel testing had been performed and the decision had been made to rely on careful flight testing for the evaluation of the vehicles’ aerodynamic characteristics. After reviewing the results of the crash investigation, however, it was decided that the third LLTV be loaded into NASA’s Super Guppy and flown to the Langley Research Center in Virginia for testing in its full-scale wind tunnel. Testing was initiated on January 7, 1968 and ended one month later on February 7.
It was quickly determined that the cause of the divergence was the Styrofoam cockpit enclosure. As the vehicle's sideslip angle reached minus two degrees, a yawing force rapidly built up that exceeded the ability of the yaw thrusters to counteract. The fix decided on was simply to remove the top of the enclosure, thus venting it and eliminating the excessive yawing force. It was also possible from the wind tunnel results to develop a preliminary flight envelope for the LLTV, defining its allowable maximum airspeed at various angles of angle of attack and sideslip. All this had to be verified by flight test, however, since it was not possible in the tunnel to obtain good data with the engine running
A high level LLTV Flight Readiness Review Board was appointed on March 5, 1969 by JSC Director Dr. Robert Gilruth. It consisted of him as chairman, with board members Chris Kraft, head of Mission Operations; George Low, head of JSC’s Apollo Program; Max Faget, JSC’s Director of Engineering and astronaut Deke Slayton, Director of Flight Crew Operations. The board reviewed the wind tunnel results, and on March 30 gave approval for the resumption of test flights in LLTV#2. The test program of 18 flights, all flown by H.E. Ream, was successfully completed on June 2, and the board finally gave approval on June 30, 1969 for Armstrong to resume LLTV flights. In the 16 days remaining before the Apollo 11 launch Armstrong was able to complete his LLTV flight training. He commented after his return:
"Eagle (the Lunar Module) flew very much like the Lunar Landing Training Vehicle which I had flown more than 30 times at Ellington Air Force Base near the Space Center. I had made from 50 to 60 landings in the trainer, and the final trajectory I flew to the landing was very much like those flown in practice. That, of course, gave me a good deal of confidence  — a comfortable familiarity."
In Armstrong’s biography First Man, astronaut Bill Anders is quoted as describing the LLTV as "a much unsung hero of the Apollo Program". Although Armstrong had to eject from the LLRV, no astronaut ever had to eject from the LLTV, and every Lunar Module pilot through the final Apollo 17 mission trained in the LLTV and flew to a landing on the Moon successfully.
LLRV#2 was eventually returned to the Armstrong Flight Research Center, where it is on display as a silent artifact of the Center's contribution to the Apollo program. In January 1971 LLTV#3 was destroyed while testing a major modification to the LLTV's computer system. Its test pilot, Stuart Present was able to eject safely. The sole surviving late-model LLTV, NASA 952, is on display at the Johnson Space Center.