Magnetically controlled shunt reactor is the transformer-type device which additionally provides functions of semiconducting key apparatus; this is ensured by means of reactor magnetic system operation in the domain of deep saturation. The basing principle allowed optimal employment of existing designs both in transformer production industry, and in the field of power electronics.Magnetic system of MCSR single phase includes two cores with windings, vertical and horizontal yokes. Control windings with opposite connection and power windings with series (accordant) connection are arranged on CST magnetic system cores. MCSR magnetic system cores are free from nonmagnetic gaps, and owing to this effect in case of the reactor connection to the network it will be in no-load condition. Herewith, the value of reactive power consumed from the grid will not exceed 3% of nominal magnitude. To increase reactor load as for reactive power, its operating range should be offset to non-linear area of hysteresis characteristic; and this is achieved for the account of additional biasing of magnetic system. At connection of regulated dc voltage source to the control windings, increase of the bias flux is ensured.

Due to the fact that ac flow of power winding is superimposed on the bias flux, the net flux is offset to the saturation domain of magnetic system cores. Respectively, saturation of the cores is resulted in occurrence of current in the power winding. In case of energy input to or output from the control circuit, the transient process of increase or decrease of network current and, respectively, of reactive power consumed by reactor is ensured.

Reactor power winding current is regulated according to proportional control mode, when control angle of rectified current source thyristors is changed according to proportional mode depending on mismatching between the prescribed voltage setting and the voltage at the point of reactor connection. In case of necessity to implement the rapid transfer of the reactor from one quasi-steady-state mode to another one, the scheme of overexcitation/underexcitation is realized. In such case, time to gain full power starting from no-load condition is reduced up to 0,3 s. Constructively, it is possible to ensure every speed of the reactor power variation. However, based on practical experience of MCSR application, the optimal balance between the reactor operating speed and capacity of biasing system has been determined: speed of power increase/relief within 0,3 – 1,0 s, capacity of biasing system – 1 – 2% of the reactor rated capacity.

Depending upon desired requirements, MCSR is adjusted in such a way that would be possible to realize either voltage level stabilization, or consumed reactive power value, or consumed current magnitude. Controlled reactors, same as their non-controlled analogues, are subdivided into bus reactors and line reactors. Based on this principle, MCSR design would be completed with additional element which ensures pre-biasing of electromagnetic part and subsequent inertialess energizing of the reactor (with power increase time less than one cycle of power frequency). Similar to all transformer equipment, MCSR is able to withstand long-term overload up to 120 – 130% as well as should-term overload up to 200%. Moreover, considering the additional measures and the control algorithms, MCSR realizes all functions of uncontrolled shunt reactor including ability to operate within the interval of single-phase automatic reclosing.