The expansion of a plasma in a magnetic nozzle is inherently more complex than the expansion of a gas in a solid nozzle, and is the result of several intertwined phenomena, which ultimately rely on the large mass difference between electrons and ions and the electric and magnetic interactions between them and the applied field.
If the strength of the applied magnetic field is sufficient, it magnetizes the light electrons in the plasma, which therefore describe a helicoidal motion about the magnetic lines. In practice, this is achieved with magnetic fields in the range of a few hundred Gauss. The guiding center of each electron is forced to travel along one magnetic tube. This magnetic confinement prevents the uncontrolled expansion of the electrons in the radial direction and guides them axially downstream. The heavier ions are typically unmagnetized or only partially magnetized, but are forced to expand with the electrons thanks to the electric field that is set up in the plasma to maintain quasineutrality. As a result of the ensuing electric field, the ions are accelerated downstream, while all electrons except the more energetic ones are confined upstream. In this way, the electric field helps convert the electron internal energy into directed ion kinetic energy.
In steady-state operation, the exhausted plasma jet is globally current-free, i.e., the total ion current and electron current at each section are equal. This condition prevents the continuous electrical charging of the spacecraft on which the magnetic nozzle is mounted, which would result if the amount of ions and electrons emitted per unit time differ.
The electron pressure being confined by the magnetic field gives rise to a diamagnetic drift, which is proportional to the pressure of electrons and inversely proportional to the magnetic field strength. Together with the



E
×
B


{\displaystyle E\times B}
drift, the diamagnetic drift is responsible of the formation of an azimuthal electric current




j

θ




{\displaystyle j_{\theta }}
in the plasma domain. This azimuthal electric current generates an induced magnetic field which opposes the applied one, generating a repulsive magnetic force



∝

j

θ


B


{\displaystyle \propto j_{\theta }B}
that pushes the plasma downstream. The reaction to this force is felt on the magnetic generator of the magnetic nozzle and is called magnetic thrust. This is the main thrust generation mechanism in a magnetic nozzle.