A magnetic gear resembles in part, the traditional mechanical gear. All cogs of each gear component of magnetic gears act as a magnet with periodic alternation of opposite magnetic poles on mating surfaces. Gear components are mounted with a "cushioned" backlash capability similar to other mechanical gearings with no cushioning effect. Although they can exert as much force as a traditional gear, such gears work without touching and so are immune to wear of mating surfaces, have very low noise and can slip without damage, making them very reliable. They can be used in configurations that are not possible for gears that must be physically touching and can operate with a barrier completely separating the driving force from the load. The magnetically coupled gear can transmit force into a hermetically sealed enclosure without using a radial shaft seal, which may leak. Hermetically sealed processes are not contaminated or chemically affected by the magnetic gear. This can be an advantage in explosive or otherwise hazardous environments where leaks constitute a real danger.
Magnetic gears advantages:
Leak proof mechanical coupling
Shear / overload proof mechanical coupling
Wear is limited to bearings, not mating contact surfaces of gears
Interchangeable ratios either electronically or mechanically in minutes not hours.
The magnetic gear is a magnetic coupling device that renders a mechanical ratio between two magnetically-coupled devices such that:
They have a ratio of rotation or translational movement between input and output which may be unity in the case of a pure magnetic coupling or one of many gear ratios in a magnetic gearbox.
They have a torque or traction limiting factor based on the magnetic coupling force.
They have no physical contact between the main driving and driven elements.
A magnetic gear is composed of magnets of the type permanent, electromagnetic or otherwise magnetically induced fields. It consists of two or more elements that are usually rotating but can be linear or curve linear in nature.
The classical gear is defined as a ratio of pole pairs. Where the Pole pairs are magnets N-S and S-N in nature. For the ratio to be affected there must be at least two elements. with Magnetic pole pair pieces.
Such devices were invented Armstrong, C. G., 1901, “Power Transmitting Device”, U.S. Pat. No. 0,687,292 and developed further from the 1940s