Sports cars are also often equipped with manual transmissions because they offer more direct driver involvement and better performance, though this is changing as many automakers move to faster dual-clutch transmissions, which are generally shifted with paddles located behind the steering wheel. For example, the 991 Porsche 911 GT3 uses Porsche's PDK. Off-road vehicles and trucks often feature manual transmissions because they allow direct gear selection and are often more rugged than their automatic counterparts.
Conversely, manual transmissions are no longer popular in many classes of vehicles sold in North America, Australia, and some parts of Asia, although they remain dominant in other parts of Asia, and in Europe, Africa, and Latin America. Nearly all vehicles are available with an automatic transmission option, and family vehicles and large pickup trucks sold in the US are predominantly fitted with automatics. However, in some cases, if a buyer wishes, they can have the vehicle fitted with a manual transmission at the factory. In Europe, most vehicles are sold with manual transmissions. Most luxury vehicles are only available with an automatic transmission. In most cases where both transmissions are available for a given model of vehicle, automatics are an at-cost option, but in some cases the reverse is true. Some vehicles, such as rentals and taxicabs, are nearly universally equipped with automatic transmissions in countries such as the United States, but the opposite is true in Europe. As of 2008, 75.2% of vehicles made in Western Europe were equipped with manual transmission, versus 16.1% with automatic and 8.7% with other.
When a driver passes their driving test using a vehicle with an automatic transmission, in some jurisdictions; the resulting driving licence is restricted to the use of vehicles with automatic transmissions only. This is the case in countries such as New Zealand (for the second-phase Restricted license, but not the final Full license), the European Union with the exception of member countries that opt to disallow road tests on automatic vehicles completely, China, Dominican Republic, Israel, Jordan, Norway, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Switzerland, and the U.A.E. This treatment of the manual transmission skill seems to maintain the widespread use of the manual transmission. As many new drivers worry that their restricted license will become an obstacle for them where most vehicles have manual transmissions, they make the effort to learn with manual transmissions and obtain full licenses. Some other countries (such as Turkey, Greece, Georgia, India, Pakistan, Portugal, Malaysia, Serbia, Brazil, Ukraine and Denmark) go even further, whereby the license is granted only when a test is passed on a manual transmission. In Denmark and Brazil, drivers are allowed to sit the test in an automatic vehicle if they are disabled, but with such a license they will not be allowed to drive a vehicle with a manual transmission.