The crosshead engine, also known as a square, sawmill or A-frame engine, was a type of paddlewheel engine used in the United States. It was the most common type of engine in the early years of American steam navigation.
The crosshead engine is described as having a vertical cylinder above the crankshaft, with the piston rod secured to a horizontal crosshead, from each end of which, on opposite sides of the cylinder, extended a connecting rod which rotated its own separate crankshaft. The crosshead operated within vertical guides that enabled the assembly to maintain the correct path as it moved. The engine's alternative name "A-frame" presumably derived from the shape of the frames supporting these guides. Some crosshead engines had more than one cylinder, in which case the piston rods were usually all connected to the same crosshead. An unusual feature of early examples of this type of engine was the installation of flywheels—geared to the crankshafts—which were thought necessary to ensure smooth operation. These gears could apparently be very noisy in operation.
Because the cylinder was placed above the crankshaft in this type of engine, it had a high center of gravity and was therefore deemed unsuitable for oceangoing service, so that its use was largely confined to vessels plying inland waterways. As marine engines grew steadily larger and heavier through the course of the century, the high center of gravity of square crosshead engines became increasingly impractical, leading to their abandonment by the 1840s in favor of the walking beam engine.
The name of this engine can sometimes lead to confusion as "crosshead" is also an alternative name for the steeple engine (see below). Many sources thus prefer to refer to it by its informal name of "square" engine to avoid confusion. Additionally, the marine crosshead or square engine described in this section should not be confused with the term "square engine" as applied to internal combustion engines, which in the latter case refers to an engine whose bore is equal to its stroke.