In the electric and magnetic field formulation there are four equations. The two inhomogeneous equations describe how the fields vary in space due to sources. Gauss's law describes how electric fields emanate from electric charges. Gauss's law for magnetism describes magnetic fields as closed field lines not due to magnetic monopoles. The two homogeneous equations describe how the fields "circulate" around their respective sources. Ampère's law with Maxwell's addition describes how the magnetic field "circulates" around electric currents and time varying electric fields, while Faraday's law describes how the electric field "circulates" around time varying magnetic fields.
A separate law of nature, the Lorentz force law, describes how the electric and magnetic field act on charged particles and currents. A version of this law was included in the original equations by Maxwell but, by convention, is no longer included.
The precise formulation of Maxwell's equations depends on the precise definition of the quantities involved. Conventions differ with the unit systems, because various definitions and dimensions are changed by absorbing dimensionful factors like the speed of light c. This makes constants come out differently. The most common form is based on conventions used when quantities measured using SI units, but other commonly used conventions are used with other units including Gaussian units based on the cgs system, Lorentz–Heaviside units (used mainly in particle physics), and Planck units (used in theoretical physics).
The vector calculus formulation below has become standard. It is mathematically much more convenient than Maxwell's original 20 equations and is due to Oliver Heaviside. The differential and integral equations formulations are mathematically equivalent and are both useful. The integral formulation relates fields within a region of space to fields on the boundary and can often be used to simplify and directly calculate fields from symmetric distributions of charges and currents. On the other hand, the differential equations are purely local and are a more natural starting point for calculating the fields in more complicated (less symmetric) situations, for example using finite element analysis. For formulations using tensor calculus or differential forms, see alternative formulations. For relativistically invariant formulations, see relativistic formulations.