Week 1
4th Qualifying Final: 1st v 8th
3rd Qualifying Final: 2nd v 7th
2nd Qualifying Final: 3rd v 6th
1st Qualifying Final: 4th v 5th
The organisation of the rest of the finals series is dependent upon whether teams won or lost in week 1 and their final ranking on the ladder before the finals. The two lowest-ranked losers are eliminated from the finals, while the two highest-ranked winners progress straight to Week 3.
Week 2
1st Semi Final: 4th highest-ranked winner v 2nd highest-ranked loser
2nd Semi Final: 3rd highest-ranked winner (from week 1) v 1st highest-ranked loser (from week 1)
The two losing teams are eliminated, the two winning teams progress to Week 3.
Week 3
1st Preliminary Final: 1st highest-ranked winner (from Week 1) v winner of 1st Semi Final
2nd Preliminary Final: 2nd highest-ranked winner (from Week 1) v winner of 2nd Semi Final
The two losing teams are eliminated, the two winning teams progress to Week Four.
Week 4
Grand Final: winner of 1st Preliminary Final v winner of 2nd Preliminary Final
Scheduling
A key element of an effective McIntyre system is scheduling in week 1. In the first week games must be played in the following order: 4 v 5, 3 v 6, 2 v 7, 1 v 8. Teams in the first two games are playing for the chance of a bye in the second week of the finals. If the final two games ultimately go as predicted, then the chance of a bye or the risk of elimination disappears. Therefore, those games need to be played last so that there is never a situation where two teams know that their result would not matter.
1st: Advances with a win to preliminary final (week 3). Must play the semifinal with a loss, cannot be eliminated in week 1, and has a 18,75% of winning the tournament.
2nd: Same as 1st, but has a more difficult opponent in week 1 (7th instead 8th).
3rd: Advances to preliminary final with a win AND at least one upset in one of the two last qualifying finals (1st or 2nd loses his qualifying final). Must play the semifinal with a win and no upset in last two qualifying finals or a loss if there´s at least one hopeful result in two last qualifying finals. Is eliminated if he loses AND 1st and 2nd too. (Has a 15.625% of winning the tournament).
4th: Advances to preliminary final with a win AND there are at least two upsets in remaining qualifying finals. It must play the semifinal if there are, at least, two hopeful results in other qualifying finals, regardless his result. Is eliminated with a loss AND, at least, two upsets (He has a 12,5% of winning the tournament).
5th: Same as 4th (but play away his qualifying final against 4th).
6th: Advances to preliminary final with a win AND 7th and 8th win their qualifying finals. It must play the semi final with a win AND, if there is, at least, one hopeful result, OR, if he loses, if there are BOTH hopeful results in remaining qualifying finals. Is eliminated with a loss AND one upset, at least, in remaining qualifying finals. (He has a 9,375% of winning the tournament).
7th: It can't advance straight to preliminary final. Advances to semifinal with a win and is eliminated with a loss (He has a 6,25% of winning the tournament).
8th: Same as 7th (but he has a more difficult opponent in week 1 -1st instead 2nd).
1st, 2nd, 7th and 8th depend on themselves. 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th depend on their results and other qualifying finals results