In the OPERA experiment, 17-GeV neutrinos have been used, split in proton extractions of 10,5 µs length generated at CERN, which hit a target at a distance of 743 km. Then pions and kaons are produced which partially decayed into muons and muon neutrinos (CERN Neutrinos to Gran Sasso, CNGS). The neutrinos traveled further to the Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS) 730 km away, where the OPERA detector is located. GPS was used to synchronize the clocks and to determine the exact distance. In addition, optical fibers were used for signal transmission at LNGS. The temporal distribution of the proton extractions was statistically compared with approximately 16000 neutrino events. OPERA measured an early neutrinos arrival of approximately 60 nanoseconds, as compared to the expected arrival at the speed of light, thus indicating a neutrino speed faster than that of light. Contrary to the MINOS result, the deviation was 6σ and thus apparently significant.
To exclude possible statistical errors, CERN produced bunched proton beams between October and November 2011. The proton extractions were split into short bunches of 3 ns at intervals of 524 ns, so that every neutrino event could be directly connected to a proton bunch. The measurement of twenty neutrino events again gave an early arrival of about 62 ns, in agreement with the previous result. They updated their analysis and increased the significance up to 6,2σ.
In February and March 2012, it was shown that there were two mistakes in the experimental equipment: An erroneous cable connection at a computer card, making the neutrinos appearing faster than expected. The other one was an oscillator out of its specification, making the neutrinos appearing slower than expected. Then the time of arrival of cosmic high-energy muons at OPERA and the co-located LVD detector between 2007–2008, 2008–2011, and 2011–2012 were compared. It was found out that between 2008–2011, the cable connector error caused a deviation of approximately 73 ns, and the oscillator error caused ca. 15 ns in the opposite direction. This and the measurement of neutrino velocities consistent with the speed of light by the ICARUS collaboration (see ICARUS (2012)), indicated that the neutrinos were actually not faster than light.