The impressions humans leave each other with after interactions, whether active or passive, help to build reputations.
A study by Espejo (2003) has demonstrated that the extent of a social interaction does not significantly affect short-term memory retention for that interaction. This indicates that the processes by which impressions are formed do not take much time to occur. Furthermore, as these results were demonstrated in rats with lesioning in the medial prefrontal cortex, a key brain structure for social interaction, they suggest a multi-component system of memory. However, a study by Belmore (1987) on impression formation and serial position indicated that behaviours from early in an acquaintance are no better recalled than later events.
Expectations about a person can influence what is remembered about that individual after an initial interaction. Therefore, such information affects the impression one person makes on another. For example, Srull (1981) found that people had better recall for memories of a person acting in a way opposite to previous expectations. This was attributed to the repeated retrieval of such memories in attempts to reconcile them with the person's reputation.
Furthermore, the memories that contribute to an impression appear to be influenced by negativity and the source of behaviour. Research on the subject indicates that people are more likely to remember negative behaviour when it is perceived as coming from a moral or dispositional source, and positive behaviour when seen as coming from either a person's ability or a need to suit the situation. Positive behaviours result from a desire to appear socially acceptable, whereas negative behaviours are more revealing of the individual's personality. Thus, negative behaviours lead to more questioning of the individual's actual personality, which in turn results in more methodical processing of that person's behaviour. This is believed to produce better memory for events by forming more associative links to the memory of that behaviour. However, positive behaviour may also be subject to this improved memory if there is reason to doubt the behaviour. If a critical assessment of an individual's actions results in a contrast to their positive image, the amount of interaction with that person will decrease.