Memory conformity, also known as social contagion of memory, refers to a situation in which one or several persons' report of a memory influences one person or a group's report of that same experience. Memory conformity is a memory error due to social influences. and prominent in situations involving social interaction, media broadcasting and eyewitness testimony. It can occur when individuals discuss what they saw or experienced, and can result in the memories of those involved being influenced by the report of another person towards conformity . Research on memory conformity has revealed that such suggestibility has far reaching consequences, with important legal and social implications. It is one of many social influences on memory.
A major component of memory conformity is source monitoring or source memory, by which an individual determines where they learned certain information (friend, TV show, teacher etc.). A source-monitoring error can lead to an incorrect internal attribution of a memory (the belief that a memory was made from first-hand experience), when in reality that information had an external source (someone else relayed the information). Social interaction can increase source-monitoring errors, with law studies showing that participants attributed their memory to an incorrect source about 50% of the time.
Three influences contribute to memory conformity: normative influences, information influences and memory distortion. Normative and informational influences on memory are both social influences that can lead to conformity, a modification of behavior in response to actual or imagined pressure from others. Social influence has a strong impact on the retrieval process of memories. Potential social conformity may be affected by factors such as status, power and confidence (both in oneself and in the credibility of a collaborator). This influence can alter memories, making them partially or entirely false. Memory distortion, closely related to the misinformation effect, describes a memory impairment which surfaces after one learns misleading information.