In this instance an SRR uses layers of a metallic mesh of thin wires – with wires in the three directions of space and slices of foam. This material's permittivity above the plasma frequency can be positive and less than one. This means that the refractive index is just above zero. The relevant parameter is often the contrast between the permittivities rather than the overall permittivity value at desired frequencies. This occurs because the equivalent (effective) permittivity has a behavior governed by a plasma frequency in the microwave domain. This low optical index material then is a good candidate for extremely convergent microlenses. Methods that have been developed theoretically using dielectric photonic crystals applied in the microwave domain to realize a directive emitter using metallic grids.
In this instance, arrayed wires in a cubic, crystal lattice structure can be analyzed as an array of aerials (antenna array). As a lattice structure it has a lattice constant. The lattice constant or lattice parameter refers to the constant distance between unit cells in a crystal lattice.
The earlier discovery of plasmons created the view that metal at plasmon frequency fp is a composite material. The effect of plasmons on any metal sample is to create properties in the metal such that it can behave as a dielectric, independent of the wave vector of the EM excitation (radiation) field. Furthermore, a minute-fractionally small amount of plasmon energy is absorbed into the system denoted as γ. For aluminium fp = 15 eV, and γ = 0.1 eV. Perhaps the most important result of the interaction of metal and the plasma frequency is that permittivity is negative below the plasma frequency, all the way to the minute value of γ.
These facts ultimately result in the arrayed wire structure as being effectively a homogeneous medium.
This metamaterial allows for control of the direction of emission of an electromagnetic radiation source located inside the material in order to collect all the energy in a small angular domain around the normal. By using a slab of a metamaterial, diverging electromagnetic waves are focused into a narrow cone. Dimensions are small in comparison to the wavelength and thus the slab behaves as a homogeneous material with a low plasma frequency.