In the field of x-ray generation by heavy ion impact on solids, the search for the x-ray signatures of the inner-shell-bound quasimolecule in the x-ray generating scattering process can be traced down to the work by Mott in the 1930s. The quasimolecule can be considered as a collisional complex that is a manifestation of MIMS during collision processes. However, the actual experimental searches for such x-ray signatures of the quasimolecule in x-ray generation in heavy ion impact started much later, in the 1970s. One of the primary motivations of these researches was to explore a super-heavy quasimolecule/quasiatom with a combined atomic number exceeding 100, which was predicted to behave like a transuranium atom in the united atom frame.
In the early heavy ion collision researches, the cross-sections for carbon K x-ray production were measured for a wide range of ions incident on a carbon target, at energies from 20 to 80 keV. The carbon Kα x-ray generation cross sections for the heavy ions, such as Ar+ and Xe+, were discovered to be several orders of magnitude larger than those by light ions, such as H+ and He+, which were consistent with the values predicted by the direct Coulomb scattering theory. The anomalous cross sections for heavy ions were qualitatively interpreted in terms of the electron-promotion mechanism of the molecular orbital theory. In his papers, Bae proposed that the production of the shocked regions that are able to bear abundant MIMS by the heavy ion impacts as in the nanoparticle impact can be another major factor for the observed x-ray yield enhancement.
More importantly, there had been extensive theoretical and experimental researches on intense K-shell satellites above the Kα line of various solids that were bombarded by heavy ions with kinetic energies on the order of 10 MeV. In the researches, the K-shell satellites were interpreted to result from radiative decays of atoms with multiple holes, one of which is in the K-shell and others in the L-shell. Striking differences between the satellite spectra obtained with light ions, such as electrons and protons, and the spectra with heavy ions were discovered. In addition to the intensity difference, the x-ray spectra obtained with heavy ions showed many more peaks with multiple L-shell holes than those with light ions. The x-ray energies of the satellites were consistent with those obtained by the ab initio calculations based on the atomic model x-ray emissions that involve varying number of L-shell holes. However, the satellite data for larger number of L-shell holes significantly deviated from the calculation results. Based on the MIMS model, the x-ray satellite structures are now understood to result from the interaction between the vibrational state of K-MIMS and the L-shell electron ionization channels.