The real component values for negative permittivity and permeability results in real component values for negative refraction n. In a lossless medium, all that would exist are real values. This concept can be used to map out phase compensation when a conventional lossless material, DPS, is matched with a lossless NIM (DNG).
In phase compensation, the DPS of thickness d1 has ε > 0 and µ > 0. Conversely, the NIM of thickness d2 has ε < 0 and µ < 0. Assume that the intrinsic impedance of the DPS dielectric material (d1) is the same as that of the outside region and responding to a normally incident planar wave. The wave travels through the medium without any reflection because the DPS impedance and the outside impedance are equal. However, the plane wave at the end of DPS slab is out of phase with the plane wave at the beginning of the material.
The plane wave then enters the lossless NIM (d2). At certain frequencies ε < 0 and µ < 0 and n < 0. Like the DPS, the NIM has intrinsic impedance that is equal to the outside, and, therefore, is also lossless. The direction of power flow (i.e., the Poynting vector) in the first slab should be the same as that in the second one, because the power of the incident wave enters the first slab (without any reflection at the first interface), traverses the first slab, exits the second interface, enters the second slab and traverses it, and finally leaves the second slab. However, as stated earlier, the direction of power is anti-parallel to the direction of phase velocity. Therefore, the wave vector k2 is in the opposite direction of k1. Furthermore, whatever phase difference is developed by traversing the first slab can be decreased and even cancelled by traversing the second slab. If the ratio of the two thicknesses is d1 / d 2 = n2 / n1, then the total phase difference between the front and back faces is zero. This demonstrates how the NIM slab at chosen frequencies acts as a phase compensator. It is important to note that this phase compensation process is only on the ratio of d1 / d 2 rather than the thickness of d1 + d1. Therefore, d1 + d1 can be any value, as long as this ratio satisfies the above condition. Finally, even though this two-layer structure is present, the wave traversing this structure would not experience the phase difference.
Following this, the next step is the subwavelength cavity resonator.