The addition of an SRR-DNG metamaterial increased the radiated power by more than an order of magnitude over a comparable free space antenna. Electrically small antennas, high directivity and tunable operational frequency are produced with negative magnetic permeability. When combining a right-handed material (RHM) with a Veselago-left-handed material (LHM) other novel properties are obtained. A single negative material resonator, obtained with an SRR, can produce an electrically small antenna when operating at microwave frequencies, as follows:
The configuration of an SRR assessed was two concentric annular rings with relative opposite gaps in the inner and outer ring. Its geometrical parameters were R = 3.6 mm, r = 2.5 mm, w = 0.2 mm, t = 0.9 mm. R and r are used in annular parameters, w is the spacing between the rings and t = the width of the outer ring. The material had a thickness of 1.6 mm. Permittivity was 3.85 at 4 GHz. The SRR was fabricated with an etching technique onto a 30 μm thick copper substrate. The SRR was excited by using a monopole antenna. The monopole antenna was composed of a coaxial cable, ground plane and radiating components. The ground plane material was aluminium. The operation frequency of the antenna was 3.52 GHz, which was determined by considering the geometrical parameters of SRR. An 8.32 mm length of wire was placed above the ground plane, connected to the antenna, which was one quarter of the operation wavelength. The antenna worked with a feed wavelength of 3.28 mm and feed frequency of 7.8 GHz. The SRR's resonant frequency was smaller than the monopole operation frequency.
The monopole-SRR antenna operated efficiently at (λ/10) using the SRR-wire configuration. It demonstrated good coupling efficiency and sufficient radiation efficiency. Its operation was comparable to a conventional antenna at λ/2, which is a conventional antenna size for efficient coupling and radiation. Therefore, the monopole-SRR antenna becomes an acceptable electrically small antenna at the SRR's resonance frequency.
When the SRR is made part of this configuration, characteristics such as the antenna's radiation pattern are entirely changed in comparison to a conventional monopole antenna. With modifications to the SRR structure the antenna size could reach (λ/40). Coupling 2, 3, and 4 SRRs side by side slightly shifts radiation patterns.