Space Motion Sickness (SMS) is thought to be a subtype of motion sickness that plagues nearly half of all astronauts who venture into space. SMS, along with facial stuffiness from headward shifts of fluids, headaches, and back pain, is part of a broader complex of symptoms that comprise Space Adaptation Syndrome (SAS).   SMS was first described in 1961 during the second orbit of the fourth manned spaceflight when the Cosmonaut, Gherman Titov aboard the Vostok 2, described feeling disoriented with physical complaints mostly consistent with motion sickness.  It is one of the most studied physiological problems of spaceflight but continues to pose a significant difficulty for many astronauts.  In some instances, it can be so debilitating that astronauts must sit out from their scheduled occupational duties in space – including missing out on a spacewalk they have spent months training to perform. In most cases, however, astronauts will work through the symptoms even with degradation in their performance.
Despite their experiences in some of the most rigorous and demanding physical maneuvers on earth, even the most seasoned astronauts may be affected by SMS, resulting in symptoms of severe nausea, projectile vomiting, fatigue, malaise (feeling sick), and headache. These symptoms may occur so abruptly and without any warning that space travelers may vomit suddenly without time to contain the emesis, resulting in strong odors and liquid within the cabin which may affect other astronauts. Symptoms typically last anywhere from one to three days upon entering weightlessness, but may recur upon reentry to Earth’s gravity or even shortly after landing.  SMS differs from terrestrial motion sickness in that sweating and pallor are typically minimal or absent and gastrointestinal findings usually demonstrate absent bowel sounds indicating reduced gastrointestinal motility.
Even when the nausea and vomiting resolve, some central nervous system symptoms may persist which may degrade the astronaut’s performance. Graybiel and Knepton proposed the term “sopite syndrome” to describe symptoms of lethargy and drowsiness associated with motion sickness in 1976. Since then, their definition has been revised to include “…a symptom complex that develops as a result of exposure to real or apparent motion and is characterized by excessive drowsiness, lassitude, lethargy, mild depression, and reduced ability to focus on an assigned task.” Together, these symptoms may pose a substantial threat (albeit temporary) to the astronaut who must remain attentive to life and death issues at all times.
SMS is most commonly thought to be a disorder of the vestibular system that occurs when sensory information from the visual system (sight) and the proprioceptive system (posture, position of the body) conflicts with misperceived information from the semicircular canals and the otoliths within the inner ear.  This is known as the ‘neural mismatch theory’ and was first suggested in 1975 by Reason and Brand. Alternatively, the fluid shift hypothesis suggests that weightlessness reduces the hydrostatic pressure on the lower body causing fluids to shift toward the head from the rest of the body. These fluid shifts are thought to increase cerebrospinal fluid pressure (causing back aches), intracranial pressure (causing headaches), and inner ear fluid pressure (causing vestibular dysfunction).
Despite a multitude of studies searching for a solution to the problem of SMS, it remains an ongoing problem for space travel.  Most non-pharmacological countermeasures such as training and other physical maneuvers have offered minimal benefit.  Thornton and Bonato noted, “Pre- and inflight adaptive efforts, some of them mandatory and most of them onerous, have been, for the most part, operational failures.” To date, the most common intervention is promethazine, an injectable antihistamine with antiemetic properties, but sedation can be a problematic side effect. Other common pharmacological options include metaclopromide, as well as oral and transdermal application of scopolamine, but drowsiness and sedation are common side effects for these medications as well.