Since orbital variations are predictable, any model that relates orbital variations to climate can be run forward to predict future climate.
An often-cited 1980 orbital model by Imbrie predicted "the long-term cooling trend that began some 6,000 years ago will continue for the next 23,000 years." More recent work suggests that orbital variations should gradually increase 65° N summer insolation over the next 25,000 years. Earth's orbit will become less eccentric for about the next 100,000 years, so changes in this insolation will be dominated by changes in obliquity, and should not decline enough to cause an ice age in the next 50,000 years.
However, the mechanism by which orbital forcing influences climate is not well understood nor definitive:
Earth is not homogeneous. Milankovitch did not relate Earth's ice ages to the total amount of solar radiation (insolation) reaching Earth but to the insolation striking 65° N in summer, due to the relative ease of heating the larger land masses of the northern hemisphere. Later studies have suggested that insolation hitting ice would simply be reflected away.
Earth is not inert. Geology affects climate, not just from the heat of the Earth's core, but from changes to the atmosphere caused by volcanic eruptions. Even the configuration of land masses and ice masses changes over time due to continental drift.
The flourishing and industrial activity of humankind may affect climate (may contribute anthropogenic effects) in ways not predicted by orbital models. Many studies have concluded that detectable increases in greenhouse gas in the 20th and 21st centuries would trap energy and result in a warmer climate. A previous theory was that industrial particulate pollution of the atmosphere would block solar radiation and result in cooling.
The article Future of earth presents a variety of infrequent events, such as collisions of bodies within the solar system and encounters with bodies outside the solar system, with the potential to make past or future climate deviate from a mathematical model of orbital forcing.