Energy systems in the universe may get unstable. The big bang postulated in physics is an example. Other examples are colliding galaxies G, stars or comets, nuclear decay or the last year discovered Higgs Boson or an abstract system HB, as nucleon decay insufficiently treated in science, the internet and world press. For HB I postulate a 6fold biological energies bifurcation, and before a stochastical heat chaos occurs, the generation of eight gluons. Energy systems tend to decay through intermediate energy transfer into stable systems in case their old localization allows no equilibrium. In some stable energy systems Q, their inner energies is distributed in grids which I introduce for nuclear, vectorial (HB decays) spacetime grids. Stars in newly generated G are macroscopic examples. Now astrophysics research studies the possibility of dark matter DM or dark energies DE in G. Adding up the observable G mass shows that G should decay, it is too low. On a cover page for downloads a method is described to solve this problem on nucleon base. Research in astrophysics goes in terms of nuclear QCD grids, color charge-gluon particles bound. Color charges of quarks in nucleons, however, are not treated sufficiently by QCD.
A warning is necessary, since for instance gravitons, postulated as particle carriers for gravity GR, are not experimentally verified today. I introduced for WIGRIS as new nuclear theory a color charge 3-fold whirl graviton grid for stable, color charge neutral nucleons and the group of Moebius transformations MT (acting on every a nucleon ball bounding surface) sphere S2.
MT’s are responsible for the Pauli spin group, already found about 100 years ago and experimentally well documented. The Pauli symmetry group SU(2) grids are for spacetime with a quaternionic non-commutative matrix presentation and with the non-commutative special relativistic SR metric, measuring other inertial systems with +v or -v.
The Sn are unit spheres in a higher (n + 1)-dimensional space, for n = 2 as ball surfaces. For quantum mechanics QM I suggest a complex 3-, finite dimensional Hilbert space as a matrix operator space C3 in which energy systems can be formed or decay. For HB localizations as projected energy grid, a 5-dimensional unit sphere S5 in C3 as energy carrier is suitable; its coordinates get scaled by an angle, reminding to the Einstein SR measuring angle towards other energy systems P.
In the HB case the S5 fibre bundle with fibre S1 becomes, geometrically projected, a complex 2-dimensional space, projectively closed by a sphere S2. The sphere S2 is a boundary of a newly generated system Q, arising from decaying HB’s. Its energy is sitting inside S2, can be a nucleon, a star or a galaxy. According to Einstein, it can also be observed by other stable P, having another grids measuring coordinate system.
Coordinates and measures are bound to local energy systems, not universal and not commutative as the Pauli spin. Using a scaling of relevant MT’s to coordinates 0,±1, I observe (see the literature below) that there are three groups of MT’s. Some MT count with their powers natural numbers or integers Z and are of infinite order like Z. Other ones have finite order 2, 3 or 6. Spin matrices are of order 2, reflections. The ones of order 3 can be used for instance as turning angles 0,±120 degree of an equilateral triangle. They are presented by the 3 cubic roots of unity which I attribute to the cubic GR behaviour. As symmetry group, like the Pauli spin group of order 4 or also QCD of order 8, they generate, together with the first Pauli spin matrix of order 2 (or a similar reflection of order 2), symmetry groups of order 6 or 12 (not used in physics today) for the 12fold fermionic series.
These symmetry groups are for stable nucleons as energy systems bound by an S2 with 3 quarks inside, arising from HB decays, having 6 color charges and gluon (QCD) bound integrating states CST. Single quarks don’t exist in the universe, but decay; also two quark mesons decay. CST is a spacetime grid, only possible for 3 or more quarks: For their paired color charges, hiding orthogonal as gluon frequencies, a circle as Lissajous figure is generated as boundary of a conic rotation where the quark not involved is kept fixed as the cones tip. The nucleons state changes in a 6 cycle with the triangles symmetry group, replacing in this case the Pauli spin group of quantum mechanics.