Super Strength: Miss Martian has the ability to physically lift impossibly massive amounts of weight. M'gann's strength easily surpasses the Class 100 strength level which is the ability to lift in excess of 100 tons with absolutely no effort at all, and has no known limit. M'gann's strength is aided in lifting/supporting the most massive objects, especially when flying.
Invulnerability/Durability: Miss Martian has invulnerability sufficient for her to take blows from enemies whose strength surpass even Superman, such as Despero. She can also increase her invulnerability by altering her density to become super dense. Her invulnerability protects her from the harsh environments of space and also re-entry into the earth's atmosphere. She is also totally bulletproof and bladed weapons shatter against her skin.
Flight: Miss Martian has the ability to defy gravity to hover and/or fly at extremely fast speeds. With this ability she is able to travel through space and through the atmosphere of the Earth at incredible speed at a minimum of MACH 10, but she has the ability to fly at much faster speeds.
Super Speed: Miss Martian and other Martians have speed that allows her to keep up with the Flash. Her speed grants her accelerated reaction times as well. Megan is also capable of combining speed with dexterity to pull off complicated tasks in a short time frame. In battle, she can move so fast her opponents seem much slower relative to her, creating time to avoid attacks and plan her next action. She is able to process thoughts and carry out actions with incredible speed as well.
Super Stamina/Agility: Miss Martian has nigh inexhaustible endurance and resilience. She can last for extensive periods of time without food, rest, or air. Miss Martian has been able to travel great distances in space and fight long battles without tiring. Miss Martian's agility is on a super-human level. Allowing her to become immensely more agile and able to combine her of balance, bodily coordination, speed, reflexes, strength and endurance on superhuman levels.
Super Reflexes: Miss Martian has drastically enhanced reaction speed, allowing her to dodge bullets, catch flies in mid-air, dodge and maneuver around complex attacks, catch falling objects, block detriments and react instantaneously to what others take more time to react to.
Regeneration: Miss Martian can quickly recover from almost any injury. She is able to reconstitute her body even when severed into several pieces. Her regenerative abilities have allowed her to reconstitute her body from even an extremely small mass in only a matter of seconds, and even grown a new body from a severed arm.
Shape shifting: Miss Martian has vast shape shifting abilities that stem from complete control of her molecular structure. She is able to take on any shape she pleases. She can form shapes of objects or organisms alive, extinct, or imagined, and she has often shown to grow an extra pair of arms to supplement her fighting abilities and her strength. She can become as stiff and unmovable or as flexible and malleable as she pleases. She can also alter her size or the size and length of her limbs. When increasing her size, M'gann often borrows mass from matter around her and incorporates it in her body, expelling it when she returns to her normal size. She is also capable elongating parts of her body into bladed weapons during combat. Her density is also variable and changes as she wills it. She can use this ability to become intangible and move through objects or allow attacks to fly by harmlessly through her or to become extremely dense to add more mass to her blows and increase her invulnerability. M'gann's control over her own molecular structure also allow her to adapt her visibility, granting her the ability to become invisible at will. She shape shifting abilities extend beyond even that allowing herself to change her chemical composition. M'gann can adopt the special abilities, superhuman powers, and even aspects of the internal anatomy of whatever being she uses her metamorphic powers to imitate.
Intangibility:By greatly lowering the density of her own mass, Miss Martian is able to become intangible. She has used this power often during combat to protect herself from her enemy's attacks and to pass through walls and other structures to travel. Another use of this power is phasing opponents into solid objects.
Invisibility: Miss Martian is able to control her visibility and render herself invisible to beings that can even view the entire electromagnetic spectrum. She can even appear invisible to Superman.
Telepathy:Her telepathy is one of her strongest abilities and allows her a wide variety of abilities. She can read/sense thoughts, communicate with them mentally and/or affect the minds/thoughts of countless subjects at once on a planetary scale. Her telepathic abilities also allow her to read and project thoughts over long distances, control minds, manipulate people's minds and possess them, subdue and tap into other's powers, telepathically trace and locate people, mind detection, affect people's memories, project mental illusions, and generate psi-bolts that could stun, injure, or kill others. She can also project her astral self, and the astral bodies of other people, into the astral or physical plane. She can scan entire towns with her mind, and leaf through the psyches of the inhabitants of a city to learn of their condition, or intentions. M'gann also possesses precognitive powers that occasionally allowed her to envision probable future events, and/or to see quick flashes of the immediate future.
Psionic Blasts: M'gann is able to project painful and destructive blasts, bolts, waves and beams of psionic energy for different purpose, such as to destroy or hit objects or people with a great force, illuminate an area, etc.
Psionic Shields: M'gann can generate and/or manipulate psionic energy to create solid constructs such as disks, orbs, bursts, shields, platforms, force fields, and other projectiles or constructions.
Martian Vision/Heat Vision: Miss Martian can project powerful blasts of energy from her eyes. The power of these blasts are comparable to Superman's heat vision and have been shown to be able to harm the likes of Superman and Black Adam. She is also able to project telekinetic blasts of force.
Telekinesis: Miss Martian is capable of controlling / manipulating; move; push; cut out; attack; and levitate objects even at the subatomic level. M'gann can manipulate atoms, subatomic particles, and cells perfectly. M'gann can fire extremely powerful Telekinetic Blasts, causing others to telekinetically explode and create a telekinetic shield.
Sonic Scream: Miss Martian has on occasion demonstrated the capability to emit a devastating sonic scream.
X-Ray Vision: M'gann described this ability colloquially as ionized particulate matter mapped to a variable density wave packet. It allows him to see through objects.