In 1996, Mitsubishi equipped the Lancer Evolution IV with the world's first Active Yaw Control (AYC) system. The AYC transfers drive torque between the left and right drive wheels as required. This was achieved by utilising a torque transfer rear differential which is controlled by various sensors and an electronic control unit (ECU) to enable a difference in torque to go to each of the rear wheels. The result is an improvement in cornering performance and safety compared to most purely mechanical limited slip rear differentials. The eighth generation Galant/Legnum VR-4 model was released for the Japanese market in 1996 that also featured the AYC system, in addition integrated to now fully evolved active stability control (ASC) system. The ASC generates turning force by employing braking force differentials in left and right wheels. The AYC and ASC integrated system maximizes the adhesion limits of the vehicle's tires. Controlling each wheel interdependently, AYC and ASC worked together to improve both safety and performance. The eighth generation Galant won the Car of the Year Japan award in 1996–1997.
In 2001, Mitsubishi equipped the Lancer Evolution VII with the AYC system, Mitsubishi's own Sports ABS and a newly developed Active Center Differential (ACD), which used an electronically controlled variable multi-plate clutch. The ACD has a differential limiting capacity three times greater than that of the viscous coupling-type differential used to date. Also, the ACD's ability to tailor slippage for different driving conditions enabled the levels of steering response and traction control not possible with a viscous coupling differential. In addition, a three-way manual override switch enables the driver to select tarmac, gravel or snow modes to suit his preferences or driving conditions. The ACD also frees the differential on operation of the hand brake, allowing the driver to make more effective use of side brake turns in rallies and gymkhanas. On the Evolution VII, control of the ACD and AYC systems is integrated for the very first time (integrated management of these systems is the core of Mitsubishi's AWC philosophy). In the integrated system, ACD feedback and feedforward information is transmitted to the AYC control system using parameters in such a way that the larger the ACD differential limiting force is, the larger the yaw moment generated by the AYC system. This integrated control operates so that, for example when accelerating out of a corner, the ACD enhances traction and the AYC enhances steering response and cornering performance, improving acceleration and handling more than the ACD and AYC systems would if they were operating independently. By doing so, the Lancer Evolution VII heralded the birth of Mitsubishi’s AWC technology.