The elementary generator produces a voltage in the following manner (fig. 1-3). The armature loop is 
rotated in a clockwise direction. The initial or starting point is shown at position A. (This will be 
considered the zero-degree position.) At 0º  the armature loop is perpendicular to the magnetic field. The 
black and white conductors of the loop are moving parallel to the field. The instant the conductors are 
moving parallel to the magnetic field, they do not cut any lines of flux. Therefore, no emf is induced in 
the conductors, and the meter at position A indicates zero. This position is called the NEUTRAL PLANE. 
As the armature loop rotates from position A (0º) to position B (90º), the conductors cut through more and 
more lines of flux, at a continually increasing angle. At 90º  they are cutting through a maximum number 
of lines of flux and at maximum angle. The result is that between 0º  and 90º , the induced emf in the 
conductors builds up from zero to a maximum value. Observe that from 0º  to 90º , the black conductor 
cuts DOWN through the field. At the same time the white conductor cuts UP through the field. The 
induced emfs in the conductors are series-adding. This means the resultant voltage across the brushes (the 
terminal voltage) is the sum of the two induced voltages. The meter at position B reads maximum value. 
As the armature loop continues rotating from 90º  (position B) to 180º  (position C), the conductors which 
were cutting through a maximum number of lines of flux at position B now cut through fewer lines. They 
are again moving parallel to the magnetic field at position C. They no longer cut through any lines of flux. 
As the armature rotates from 90º  to 180º , the induced voltage will decrease to zero in the same manner 
that it increased during the rotation from 0º  to 90º . The meter again reads zero. From 0º  to 180º  the 
conductors of the armature loop have been moving in the same direction through the magnetic field. 
Therefore, the polarity of the induced voltage has remained the same. This is shown by points A through 
C on the graph. As the loop rotates beyond 180º  (position C), through 270º  (position D), and back to the 
initial or starting point (position A), the direction of the cutting action of the conductors through the 
magnetic field reverses. Now the black conductor cuts UP through the field while the white conductor 
cuts DOWN through the field. As a result, the polarity of the induced voltage reverses. Following the 
sequence shown by graph points C, D, and back to A, the voltage will be in the direction opposite to that 