To transmit intelligence using pulse modulation, you must provide a method to vary some
characteristic of the pulse train in accordance with the modulating signal. Figure 2-40 illustrates a simple
pulse train. The characteristics of these pulses that can be varied are amplitude, pulse width,
pulse-repetition time, and the pulse position as compared to a reference. In addition to these three
characteristics, pulses may be transmitted according to a code to represent the different levels of the
modulating signal. To ensure maximum fidelity (accuracy in reproducing a modulating wave), the
modulating signal has to be represented by enough pulses to restore the original wave shape. Logically,
the higher the sampling rate (the more often sampled) of the pulse modulator, the more accurately the
original modulating wave can be reproduced. Figure 2-41 illustrates the effectiveness of three
pulse-sampling rates. View (A) shows a sampling rate of more than two times the modulating frequency.
As you can see, this reproduces the modulating signal very accurately. However, the high sampling rate
requires a wide bandwidth and increases the average power required of the transmitter. If less than two
samples per cycle are made, you are not able to reproduce the original modulating signal, as shown in
view (B). View (C) shows a sampling rate that is two times the highest modulating frequency. This is the
minimum sampling rate that will give a sufficiently accurate reproduction of the modulating wave. The
standard sampling rate is 2.5 times the highest frequency that is to be transmitted. This ensures the ability
to accurately reproduce the modulating waveform. In military voice systems the bandwidth for voice
signals is limited to 300 to 3,000 hertz, requiring a sampling frequency of 8 kilohertz. Although the pulse
characteristic that is changed may vary for each type of pulse modulation, the sampling frequency will
remain constant. We will now briefly discuss common types of pulse modulation.