Early models assessing the possibility of slight deviations from Lorentz invariance have been published between the 1960s and the 1990s. In addition, a series of test theories of special relativity and effective field theories (EFT) for the evaluation and assessment of many experiments have been developed, including:
The parameterized post-Newtonian formalism is widely used as a test theory for general relativity and alternatives to general relativity, and can also be used to describe Lorentz violating preferred frame effects.
The Robertson-Mansouri-Sexl framework (RMS) contains three parameters, indicating deviations in the speed of light with respect to a preferred frame of reference.
The c2 framework (a special case of the more general THεμ framework) introduces a modified dispersion relation and describes Lorentz violations in terms of a discrepancy between the speed of light and the maximal attainable speed of matter, in presence of a preferred frame.
Doubly special relativity (DSR) preserves the Planck length as an invariant minimum length-scale, yet without having a preferred reference frame.
Very special relativity describes space-time symmetries that are certain proper subgroups of the Poincaré group. It was shown that special relativity is only consistent with this scheme in the context of quantum field theory or CP conservation.
Noncommutative geometry (in connection with Noncommutative quantum field theory or the Noncommutative standard model) might lead to Lorentz violations.
Lorentz violations are also discussed in relation to Alternatives to general relativity such as Loop quantum gravity, Emergent gravity, Einstein aether theory, Hořava–Lifshitz gravity.
However, the Standard-Model Extension (SME) in which Lorentz violating effects are introduced by spontaneous symmetry breaking, is used for most modern analyses of experimental results. It was introduced by Kostelecký and colleagues in 1997 and the following years, containing all possible Lorentz and CPT violating coefficients not violating gauge symmetry. It includes not only special relativity, but the standard model and general relativity as well. Models whose parameters can be related to SME and thus can be seen as special cases of it, include the older RMS and c2 models, the Coleman-Glashow model confining the SME coefficients to dimension 4 operators and rotation invariance, and the Gambini-Pullin model or the Myers-Pospelov model corresponding to dimension 5 or higher operators of SME.