For most tagging systems the total number of tags in the collective vocabulary is much less than the total number of objects being tagged. Given this multiplicity of tags to documents, a question remains: how effective are the tags at isolating any single document? Naively, if we specify a single tag in this system we would uniquely identify lots of documents – thus the answer to our question is "not very well!". However this method carries a faulty assumption; not every document is equal. Some documents are more popular and important than others, and this importance is conveyed by the number bookmarks per document. Thus, we can reformulate the above question to be: how well does the mapping of tags to documents retain about the distribution of the documents? Information theory provides a natural framework to understand the amount of shared information between two random variables. The conditional entropy measures the amount of entropy remaining in one random variable when we know the value of a second random variable. Work done by Chi and Mytkowicz show that the entropy of documents conditional on tags, H(D|T), is increasing rapidly. What this means is that, even after knowing completely the value of a tag, the entropy of the set of documents is increasing over time. Conditional Entropy asks the question: "Given that I know a set of tags, how much uncertainty regarding the document set that I was referencing with those tags remains?" The fact that this curve is strictly increasing suggests that the specificity of any given tag is decreasing. That is to say, as a navigation aid, tags are becoming harder and harder to use. We are moving closer and closer to the proverbial "needle in a haystack" where any single tag references too many documents to be considered useful.
Another way to look at the data is to think about mutual information, which is a measure of independence between the two variables. Full independence is reached when I(D;T) = 0. Chi and Mytkowicz research on delicious social tagging data show that as a measure of usefulness of the tags and their encoding, there is a worsening trend in the ability of users to specify and find tags and documents when they are engaged in simple fact retrieval. This suggests that we need to build search and recommendation systems that help users sift through resources in social tagging systems, especially when we are engaged in more than simple fact retrieval as characterized by the information theory. In fact, although the number of documents associated with any given tag is increasing, there are many ways contextual information can help users to look for relevant information. This is in fact one of the major weakness of the simple information theory in explaining usefulness of tags – it ignores the fact that humans can extract meanings from a set of tags assigned to a document, and this semantic extraction process is exactly the reason why humans are able to communicate efficiently even though the size of our vocabulary is increasing ever since language was developed. For example, the work by Cattuto et al. (2007), published in PNAS, show that while the number of tags are increasing, the general growth pattern is scale-free – the general distribution of tag-tag co-occurrences follows a power-law. Cattuto also finds that the characteristics of this scale-free distribution are dependent on the semantics of the tag – tags that are semantically general (e.g., blogs) tend to co-occur with many tags, while semantically narrow tags (e.g., Ajax) tend to co-occur with few number of tags across a wide set of documents in a social tagging system. What this means is that the assumption of the information theory approach is too simple – when the semantics of the set of tags assigned to documents are taken into account, the predictive value of tags on contents of documents are relatively stable. This finding is important for development of recommender systems – discovering these higher level semantic patterns is important in helping people to find relevant information (also see semantic imitation model below).