The Accuflow Multiphase Metering System is an example of advance test separator. It separates gas from liquid for 2 Phase measurement. The main principle of the Accuflow is to effectively separate the free gas from the liquid phase and to measure each phase independently, but with more automation than a conventional separator. With complete separation, the measurement equipment used in each phase can be utilized to their maximum effectiveness and potential.The separation of gas and liquid occurs in the Accuflow in 2 stages. Stage 1, the liquid enters a vertical pipe at a downward tangential angle creating a cyclonic action in the pipe. This cyclonic action pushes the liquid towards the pipe wall and enables the majority of the gas to release to the center of the pipe and travel up to the gas run. The liquid with some remaining gas is carried into a secondary stage of separation.
In the 2nd stage of separation, the liquid with remaining gas flows along a horizontal section of pipe. The liquid level in the horizontal pipe is controlled in the middle of the pipe. The liquid level is controlled by a liquid level sensor in the horizontal pipe and a control valve in the gas run. As the liquid level rises in the horizontal pipe, the level sensor sends a signal to the control valve and which begins to pinch shut to create some slight back pressure to push the liquid level down. Conversely, as liquid level goes goes down, the control valve beings to open to relieve pressure to allow the liquid level to rise. In essence, the control valve modulates to maintain the liquid level in the middle of the horizontal pipe. With a large gas/liquid interface area, thin gas-bearing emulsion layer and quiescent flow in the horizontal pipe, all contribute to the final removal of free gas bubbles from the liquid stream. All of the free gas removed in the horizontal section joins the gas run through a connecting run and is measured in the gas leg. The liquid, now free of gas drops to a liquid run for measurement.
In the liquid run, Coriolis metering technology is typically employed for flow measurement. Water cut can be determined by either Net Oil Computer (density method) or through a separate water cut meter. The gas is typically measured with ultrasonic, vortex, or Coriolis technology. All technologies used in the Accuflow are already currently practiced and approved by all major oil companies. After measurement the gas and liquid streams are recombined and returned to the production line.
Because the multiphase stream is completely separated into liquid and gas stream prior to measurement, the Accuflow system can operate in all flow regimes. It is applicable to full range of gas fraction.