(Lines 1–17) Directly after death, armies of angels and devils will fight for a person's soul, and they will transport it immediately, either to the joys of an eternal dwelling in Heaven, or to the fire, darkness and torments of Hell.
(18–30) Everyone must therefore do God's will in this world. Divine help can no longer be obtained, once a person lies suffering in Hell.
(31–36) When the Mighty King issues His summons (daz mahal kipannit), all humans must attend and account for their actions on earth.
(37–47) The poet has heard dia uueroltrehtuuîson (possibly: 'men wise in the laws of the world') saying that Elias (the Old Testament prophet Elijah) will fight with and defeat the Antichrist. Elias will be acting with God's help as a champion of those seeking righteousness, to secure for them a place in Heaven. The Antichrist will be supported by Satan. He will pull him down. He will therefore be denied a victory in the encounter.
(48–62) But (many?) men of God (gotmann-) believe that in that battle Elias will be wounded (or killed?). (When?) Elias's blood drips onto the earth, (then?) mountains will burst into flame, trees will no longer stand, waters will dry up, the moon will fall, the sky will smoulder, middle-earth (mittilagart) will burn. With the Day of Punishment or Penance (stuatago) at hand, no man is able to help a kinsman before the muspilli. Amidst this destruction, what is left of the borderlands where humans once fought alongside their kinsfolk? Damned souls have no further chance of remorse and will be taken off to Hell.
(63–72) A man should judge fairly on earth, because then he need not worry when standing before the Heavenly Judge. When a man disrupts the law by taking bribes, he is being secretly watched by the Devil, who will recall his misdeeds at the Final Judgment.
(73–99a) When the Heavenly Horn is sounded, the Judge, accompanied by an unconquerable host of angels, sets out for the place marked out for judgment. Angels will wake the dead and guide them to the judicial assembly (ding). All human beings will rise from the earth, free themselves from the bondage of the grave-mounds (lossan sih ar dero leuuo vazzon) and receive back their bodies, so that they may speak fully to their case. All will be judged according to their deeds. Hands, heads and all the limbs, even the little finger, will testify to the crimes they have committed. Everything will be made known to the Heavenly King, unless a sinner has already done penance with alms and fasting.
(100–103) The Cross is then brought forward, and Christ displays the wounds which He suffered because of His love for humankind.