An NVIS antenna configuration is a horizontally polarized (parallel with the surface of the earth) radiating element that is from 1/20th wavelength (λ) to 1/4 wavelength above the ground. Optimum height is about 1/4 wavelength, and high angle radiation declines only slightly for heights up to about 3/8 wavelength.  That proximity to the ground forces the majority of the radiation to go straight up. Overall efficiency of the antenna can be increased by placing a ground wire slightly longer than the antenna parallel to and directly underneath the antenna. One source says that a single ground wire can provide antenna gain in the 3–6 dB range. Another source indicates 2 dB for a single wire and nearly 4 dB for multiple ground wires. Ground wires are more necessary when using lower dipoles over poor soils as without them considerable energy goes into heating the ground.
Depending on the specific requirements, various antennas (i.e. Sloper, T2FD, Dipole) can be used for NVIS communication, with horizontal dipoles or inverted V dipoles at about 0.2 wavelengths above ground giving the best results on transmit and at about 0.16 wavelengths on receive, according to military sources and an extensive study by Dutch researchers.   Very low antennas are much inferior on transmit, less so on receive, where both noise and signal are attenuated.
Significant increases in communication will obviously be realized when both the transmitting station and the receiving station use NVIS configuration for their antennas. In particular for low profile operations NVIS antennas are a good option.
For broadcasting, typical antennas consist of a dipole about 1/4 wavelength above ground, or arrays of such dipoles. Up to 16 dipoles can be used, allowing strong signals with relatively low power by concentrating the signal in a smaller area. Limiting the coverage may be dictated by licensing, language or political considerations. Arrays of dipoles can be used to "slew" the pattern, so that the transmitter need not be in the center of the coverage footprint. Broadcast NVIS antennas usually use an extensive ground screen to increase gain and stabilize the pattern and feed impedance with changing ground moisture.