Neutrino oscillation arises from a mixture between the flavor and mass eigenstates of neutrinos. That is, the three neutrino states that interact with the charged leptons in weak interactions are each a different superposition of the three neutrino states of definite mass. Neutrinos are created in weak processes in their flavor eigenstates. As a neutrino propagates through space, the quantum mechanical phases of the three mass states advance at slightly different rates due to the slight differences in the neutrino masses. This results in a changing mixture of mass states as the neutrino travels, but a different mixture of mass states corresponds to a different mixture of flavor states. So a neutrino born as, say, an electron neutrino will be some mixture of electron, mu, and tau neutrino after traveling some distance. Since the quantum mechanical phase advances in a periodic fashion, after some distance the state will nearly return to the original mixture, and the neutrino will be again mostly electron neutrino. The electron flavor content of the neutrino will then continue to oscillate as long as the quantum mechanical state maintains coherence. Since mass differences between neutrino flavors are small in comparison with long coherence length for neutrino oscillations this microscopic quantum effect becomes observable over macroscopic distances.
In contrast, due to their larger masses, the charged leptons (electrons, muons, and tau leptons) have never been observed to oscillate. In nuclear beta decay, muon decay, pion decay, and kaon decay, when a neutrino and a charged lepton are emitted, the charged lepton, due to its large mass, is emitted in a mass eigenstate such as |e−>. Weak-force conservation laws force the corresponding neutrino to be emitted in a "charged-lepton-centric" eigenstate such as |νe>, which is an eigenstate for a "flavor" that is driven by the electron's mass eigenstate, and not by one of the neutrino's own mass eigenstates. Because the neutrino is in a coherent state that is not a mass eigenstate, its state detectably oscillates as it travels. No analogous mechanism exists in the Standard Model that would make charged leptons meaningfully oscillate. In the four decays given above, where the charged lepton is emitted in a mass eigenstate, it is obvious that the charged lepton will not oscillate, as mass eigenstates do not oscillate. The case of W boson decay is more complex. W boson decay is sufficiently energetic to generate an charged lepton that is not in a mass eigenstate; however, the charged lepton would lose coherence, if it had any, over interatomic distances (10−8 cm) and quickly cease any meaningful oscillation. More importantly, no mechanism in the Standard Model is capable in the first place of pinning down a charged lepton into a coherent state that is not a mass eigenstate; instead, while the charged lepton from the W boson decay is not initially in a mass eigenstate, neither is it in any "neutrino-centric" eigenstate, nor in any other coherent state. It cannot meaningfully be said that such a featureless charged lepton oscillates or that it does not oscillate, as any "oscillation" transformation would just leave it the same generic state that it was before the oscillation. Therefore, detection of a charged lepton oscillation from W boson decay is infeasible on multiple levels.