After Jupiter and Saturn cross the 2:1 resonance their combined gravitational influence destabilizes the Trojan co-orbital region allowing existing Trojan groups in the L4 and L5 Lagrange points of Jupiter and Neptune to escape and new objects from the outer planetesimal disk to be captured. Objects in the trojan co-orbital region undergo libration, drifting cyclically relative to the L4 and L5 points. When Jupiter and Saturn are near but not in resonance the location where Jupiter passes Saturn relative to their perihelia circulates slowly. If the period of this circulation falls into resonance with the period that the trojans librate the range of their librations can increases until they escape. When this occurs the trojan co-orbital region is "dynamically open" and objects can both escape and enter the region. Primordial trojans escape and a fraction of the numerous objects from the disrupted planetesimal disk temporarily inhabit it. Later when Jupiter and Saturn orbits are farther apart the Trojan region becomes "dynamically closed", and the planetesimals in the trojan region are captured, with many remaining today. The captured trojans have a wide range of inclinations, which had not previously been understood, due to their repeated encounters with the giant planets. The libration angle and eccentricity of the simulated population also matches observations of the orbits of the Jupiter Trojans. This mechanism of the Nice model similarly generates the Neptune trojans.
A large number of planetesimals would have also been captured in Jupiter's mean motion resonances as Jupiter migrated inward. Those that remained in a 3:2 resonance with Jupiter form the Hilda family. The eccentricity of other objects declined while they were in a resonance and escaped onto stable orbits in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU as the resonances moved inward. These captured objects would then have undergone collisional erosion, grinding the population away into smaller fragments that can then be acted on by the Yarkovsky effect, causing small objects to drift into unstable resonances, and Poynting–Robertson drag causing smaller grains to drift toward the sun. These processes remove more than 90% of the origin mass implanted into the asteroid belt according to Bottke and colleagues. The size frequency distribution of this simulated population following this erosion are in excellent agreement with observations. This suggests that the Jupiter Trojans, Hildas and some of the outer asteroid belt, all spectral D-type asteroids, are the remnant planetesimals from this capture and erosion process. It has also been suggested that the dwarf planet Ceres was captured via this process. A few D-type asteroids have been recently discovered with semi-major axes less than 2.5 AU, closer than those that would be captured in the original Nice model.