Of the three types of naturally occurring radioactivities (α, β, and γ), only alpha decay is a type of decay resulting from the nuclear strong force. The other proton and neutron decays occurred much earlier in the life of the atomic species and before the earth was formed. Thus, alpha-decay can be considered either a form of particle decay or, less frequently, as a special case of nuclear fission. The timescale for the nuclear strong force is much faster than that of the nuclear weak force or the electromagnetic force, so the lifetime of nuclei past the drip lines are typically on the order of nanoseconds or less. For alpha decay, the timescale can be much longer than for proton or neutron emission owing to the high Coulomb barrier seen by an alpha-cluster in a nucleus (the alpha particle must tunnel through the barrier). As a consequence, there are no naturally-occurring nuclei on Earth that undergo proton or neutron emission; however, such nuclei can be created, for example, in the laboratory with accelerators or naturally in stars.
Such particle decays are not commonly known because particle decay is governed by the nuclear strong force, as well as the Coulomb force in the case of charged particles, which can act very quickly (femtoseconds or less). In nuclear physics terms, nuclei that are outside the drip lines are particle-unbound and considered not to exist, because they can only exist in the energy continuum rather than in the discrete quantized states we are familiar with. In a discussion of the proton and neutron drip lines, one nomenclatural convenience is to regard beta-unstable nuclei as stable (strictly speaking they are particle-stable), due to the significant difference in the time-scales of these two different decay modes.
Thus, the only type of nuclei that are longer lived and undergo proton or neutron emission are in the class of beta-delayed decays, where first the isospin of one nucleon is reversed (proton to neutron or vice versa) via beta-decay, and then if the particle separation energy is non-positive, the daughter nucleus will undergo particle decay. Most naturally occurring γ-sources are technically β-delayed γ-decay, so this concept should be familiar; some gamma-sources are α-delayed but these are generally categorized with other alpha-sources.