The NuVinci uses rolling traction to transfer torque, just as do toroidal transmissions. However, unlike toroidal CVTs, it distributes the transmitted torque over several spheres, thus lowering total clamping force required.
This arrangement allows the NuVinci CVT to combine the smooth, continuous power transfer of a CVT with the utility of a conventional planetary gear drive.
As with other traction-type CVTs, transmission of torque through the NuVinci CVT involves some relative sliding between the torque-transmitting contact patches. This is because, for any given contact patch, parts of the ball are going in a slightly different direction and at slightly different speeds than the disc (this phenomenon of traction-type CVTs is referred to as "contact spin"). "The spin velocity (or drill speed) is defined as the difference in the rotational speed of the driving and driven rollers in a direction perpendicular to the contact patch plane. It is caused by the relative difference in surface speeds of both elements across the contact patch and is a major source of power loss in traction drive CVT’s." In all traction-type CVTs, this relative sliding necessarily occurs between surfaces which are under the very high clamping pressures required to ensure torques are transmitted reliably. This relative sliding under high pressures cause transmission losses (inefficiency). Fallbrook Technology refuse to publish any efficiency data for the NuVinci CVT. However, the NuVinci is a variant on the "Tilting-ball drive" type of continuously variable transmission (CVT), and the efficiency of "Tilting-ball drive" type CVTs is typically in the range of 70% to 89%. However, its geometry does differ significantly from the Kopp type of tilting ball variator in the reference in that the NuVinci has its torque transfer contacts on the outside diameter rather than the inside diameter, which puts the idler (an element that reacts clamping load) in compression rather than tension, and because the idler contact surface is not conformal as in the Kopp design. In general because of the way the CVT is set up, it is more efficient at a 1:1 ratio compared to maximum overdrive or underdrive positions. Independent test results have shown that at 1:1 it is actually more efficient than comparable bicycle internal gear hubs, while at the ratio extremes it is slightly lower.

Torque inputs can be summed or divided, just as in a conventional planetary. Ratio control is stable, and can be actuated down the center line of the transmission, which again is similar to the proven planetary transmission. In most applications, there is no need for high-pressure hydraulics.
Other advantages shared with similar CVT designs include that the input and output shafts may be either in-line, offset, or in a U configuration (input and output both coaxial and coplanar), making the transmission simple, small, light and easy to package.
Fallbrook claims the transmission control is stable, linear and does not require a major control system development effort.