The NuVinci CVT gear system uses a set of rotating and tilting balls positioned between the input and output discs of a transmission. Tilting the balls changes their contact diameters and varies the speed ratio. As a result, the NuVinci CVT system offers seamless and continuous transition to any ratio within its range. The gear ratio is shifted by tilting the axles of the spheres in a continuous fashion, to provide different contact radii, which in turn drive input and output discs. The system has multiple "planets" to transfer torque through multiple fluid patches. The spheres are placed in a circular array around a central idler (sun) and contact separate input and output traction discs. This configuration allows input and output to be concentric and compact. The result is the ability to sweep the transmission through the entire ratio range smoothly, while in motion, under load, or stopped.
Two factors allow the NuVinci CVT to provide a continuously variable ratio range in a compact package:
The first is the geometric configuration of the drive, which is based on differing contact ratio of a sphere. Contacting a rotating sphere at two different locations relative to the sphere’s rotational axis will provide a “gear ratio”, which can range from underdrive to overdrive depending on the location of the contact points for input and output torque and speed.
The second factor is elastohydrodynamic lubrication (EHL). Transmissions that use EHL to transfer power are known as traction drives. A traction drive transmission operates utilizing a traction fluid that, under normal circumstances, provides lubrication for the drive. When this fluid undergoes high contact pressures under rolling contact between the two very hard elements, the spheres and the discs, the fluid undergoes a near-instantaneous phase transition to an elastic solid. Within this patch of traction the molecules of the fluid stack up and link to form a solid, through which shear force and thus torque can be transferred. Note that the rolling elements are actually not in physical contact.