Ocneanu explains the conceptual challenge in working in the fourth dimension: "Although mathematicians can work with a fourth dimension abstractly by adding a fourth coordinate to the three that we use to describe a point in space, a fourth spatial dimension is difficult to visualize."
Although it is impossible to see or make 4-dimensional objects, it is possible to map them into lower dimensions to get some impressions of them. An analogy for converting the 4-D 24-cell into its 3-D sculpture is cartographic projection, where the surface of the 3-D Earth (or a globe) is reduced to a flat 2-D plane (a portable map). This is done either with light 'casting a shadow' from the globe onto the map or with some mathematical transformation. Many different types of map projection exist: the familiar rectangular Mercator (used for navigation), the circular gnomonic (first projection invented), and several others. All of them have limitations in that they show some features in a distorted manner—'you can't flatten an orange peel without damaging it'—but they are useful visual aids and convenient references.

In the same manner that the exterior of the Earth is a 2-D skin (bent into the third dimension), the exterior of a 4-dimensionsal shape is a 3-D space (but folded through hyperspace, the fourth dimension). However, just as the surface of Earth's globe can not be mapped onto a plane without some distortions, neither can the exterior 3-D shape of the 24-cell 4-D hyper-shape. In the image on the right a 24-cell is shown projected into space as a 3-D object (and then the image is a 2-D rendering of it, with perspective to aid the eye). Some of the distortions:
Curving edge lines: these are straight in four dimensions, but the projection into a lower dimension makes them appear to curve (similar effects occur when mapping the Earth).
It is necessary to use semi-transparent faces because of the complexity of the object, so the many "boxes" (octahedral cells) are seen.
Only 23 cells are clearly seen. The 24th cell is the "outside in", the whole exterior space around the object as seen in three dimensions.
To map the 24-cell, Ocneanu uses a related projection which he calls windowed radial stereographic projection. As with the stereographic projection, there are curved lines shown in 3-D space. Instead of using semitransparent surfaces, "windows" are cut into the faces of the cells so that interior cells can be seen. Also, only 23 vertices are physically present. The 24th vertice "occurs at infinity" because of the projection; what one sees is the 8 legs and arms of the sculpture diverging outwards from the center of the 3-D sculpture.