Teilhard de Chardin describes in his book, The Phenomenon of Man, his conception of evolution and its ultimate fate to which he concludes all of existence will culminate in one supreme divinity of consciousness, The Omega Point. He explains:

"This will be the end and the fulfillment of the spirit of the Earth. The end of the world: the wholesale internal introversion upon itself of the noosphere, which has simultaneously reach the uttermost limit of its complexity and centrality. The end of the world: the overthrow of equilibrium [the Heat Death], detaching the mind, fulfilled at last, from it material matrix, so that it will henceforth rest with all its weigh on God-Omega."

Teilhard states that evolution does not end with mankind: Earth's biosphere evolved before humans existed. When Homo sapiens inhabited Earth through evolution, a noosphere was created, the cognitive layer of existence. As evolution continues, the noosphere gains coherence. Teilhard refers to this process as "planetization". Eventually the noosphere gains total dominance over the biosphere, it reaches a point of complete independence from tangential energy forming a metaphysical being: the Omega Point.
First Property of the Omega Point
Teilhard's theory says humans will escape the heat death of the universe. Scientifically, this means that intelligence cannot survive. He theorizes that radial energy is non-compliant with entropy, it escapes the collapses of forces at world's end.
Second Property of the Omega Point
The Omega Point does not exist within the timeline of the universe, it occurs at the exact edge of the end of time. From that point, all sequence of existence is sucked into its being.
Third Property of the Omega Point
The Omega Point can be understood as a volume shaped as a cone in which each section taken from the base to its summit decreases until it diminishes into a final point.
Fourth Property of the Omega Point
The volume described in the Third Property must be understood as an entity with finite boundaries. Teilhard writes:

"...what would have become of humanity, if, by some remote chance, it had been free to spread indefinitely on an unlimited surface, that is to say left only to the devices of its internal affinities? Something unimaginable.... Perhaps even nothing at all, when we think of the extreme important of the role played in its development by the forces of compression."