Open VOGEL relies on an object-oriented multi-threading calculation core (CC). The aerodynamic part of the CC (the ACC) is based in hierarchical structure of classes that begins with the definition of vortex rings, which in turn, can be assembled together as bricks to form a lattice.
Lattices can be of two types: "bounded" or "free". Bounded lattices represent all solid boundaries where boundary conditions have to be imposed, while free lattices represent the wakes shed by the bounded lattices. Because of this parent-child relation, each bounded lattice contains a stack of wakes that can be automatically shed by its parent bounded lattice based on information about the primitive shedding edges.
Boundary conditions are imposed at vortex ring level. Vortex rings can be triangular or quadrilateral, but most importantly, they can be slender or solid. On slender rings, Neumann boundary conditions are imposed, while on solid rings, Dirichlet boundary conditions are imposed. Imposing one BC or the other implies calculating the local velocity or the local velocity potential.
The calculation of the velocity and the velocity potential at a given point is encapsulated inside the class definition of the vortex rings. The method that is actually implemented differ from the topology of the inducing ring (triangular or quadrilateral). Each lattice exposes then a method that allows the same calculation at lattice level by running over all contained rings.
The ACC will impose the boundary conditions by solving a system of linear equations. In a rigid model-problem, it will build a unique matrix of coefficients, generate the LU decomposition, and reuse that same matrices to find the circulation in the rings at every time step. For aeroelastic simulations, however, because the relative position of the rings is permanently changing due to the deformation of the lattices, the CC will recalculate the influence matrix and LU decomposition at each time step.
The right hand side of the system of equations containing the free-velocity and source-potential terms, is only updated at each time for unsteady problems.