General Planetary Vehicle (GPV) - a Anatoly Yunitskiy's project for the removal of weight at low circumplanet orbit. GPV is a ring located on the equator of the Earth (or parallel to the equator) consisting of individual segments connected (for example) by hydraulic cylinders. Inside the ring segments there are cells for placing the payload and necessary equipment. The heart of the GPV consists of two circular channels passing through all the segments of the ring. High vacuum is kept up in the channels and they are completely isolated from the environment. Inside these channels there are two magnetically levitated flywheel rotors assembled from small metal and flexible (e.g., polymer) segments. The flywheel rotors are held by an electromagnetic system mounted inside the GPV shell, according to the principle of magnetic levitation and act as the rotors of the giant motor (capable of operating in a generator mode as well).
The GPV ring is located on a specially equipped overpass, encircling the Earth. In the initial condition it is fixed on the overpass.
With the help of an external energy source one of the rotors spins up to speed higher than the First Cosmic Velocity at sea level (i.e. orbital speed at sea level, same as the escape velocity divided by root two). Due to the centrifugal force, the rotor (having reached the First Cosmic Velocity) balances itself and then seeks to "fly" up, producing lift force. The rotor's speed is to be a little more than necessary to balance the ring.
After releasing the clamp the GPV ring begins to rise up (increasing its radius, and accordingly, the diameter). Thus, the hydraulic cylinders and gaps between the segments allow the formation to increase its length. The belt rotor stretches by 2-5% due to its elasticity. Having achieved the required height the rotor transfers to the generator mode, and the electricity generated is used to boost the second rotor in the opposite direction. As a result, the GPV accelerates to achieve the First Cosmic Velocity on a low Earth orbit. The height reached by the GPV is determined by the abundant rotor’s initial kinetic energy and the capability of its body structure and rotors to stretch.
On the equatorial orbit the GPV is unloaded into stationary orbit cells located at the same orbital altitude in the plane of the equator.
Landing is carried out similarly in the reverse order.