In material science and solid mechanics, orthotropic materials have material properties that differ along three mutually-orthogonal twofold axes of rotational symmetry. They are a subset of anisotropic materials, because their properties change when measured from different directions.
A familiar example of an orthotropic material is wood. In wood, one can define three mutually perpendicular directions at each point in which the properties are different. These are the axial direction (along the grain), the radial direction, and the circumferential direction. Because the preferred coordinate system is cylindrical-polar, this type of orthotropy is also called polar orthotropy. Mechanical properties, such as strength and stiffness, measured axially (along the grain) are typically better than those measured in the radial and circumferential directions (across the grain). These directional differences in strength can be quantified with Hankinson's equation.
Another example of an orthotropic material is sheet metal formed by squeezing thick sections of metal between heavy rollers. This flattens and stretches its grain structure. As a result, the material becomes anisotropic—its properties differ between the direction it was rolled in and each of the two transverse directions.
If orthotropic properties vary between points inside an object, it possesses both orthotropy and inhomogeneity. This suggests that orthotropy is the property of a point within an object rather than for the object as a whole (unless the object is homogeneous). The associated planes of symmetry are also defined for a small region around a point and do not necessarily have to be identical to the planes of symmetry of the whole object.
Orthotropic materials are a subset of anisotropic materials; their properties depend on the direction in which they are measured. Orthotropic materials have three planes/axes of symmetry. An isotropic material, in contrast, has the same properties in every direction. It can be proved that a material having two planes of symmetry must have a third one. Isotropic materials have an infinite number of planes of symmetry.
Transversely isotropic materials are special orthotropic materials that have one axis of symmetry (any other pair of axes that are perpendicular to the main one and orthogonal among themselves are also axes of symmetry). One common example of transversely isotropic material with one axis of symmetry is a polymer reinforced by parallel glass or graphite fibers. The strength and stiffness of such a composite material will usually be greater in a direction parallel to the fibers than in the transverse direction, and the thickness direction usually has properties similar to the transverse direction. Another example would be a biological membrane, in which the properties in the plane of the membrane will be different from those in the perpendicular direction. Orthotropic material properties have been shown to provide a more accurate representation of bone's elastic symmetry and can also give information about the three-dimensional directionality of bone's tissue-level material properties.
It is important to keep in mind that a material which is anisotropic on one length scale may be isotropic on another (usually larger) length scale. For instance, most metals are polycrystalline with very small grains. Each of the individual grains may be anisotropic, but if the material as a whole comprises many randomly oriented grains, then its measured mechanical properties will be an average of the properties over all possible orientations of the individual grains.