Acoustics – study of mechanical waves in solids, liquids, and gases (such as vibration and sound)
Agrophysics – study of physics applied to agroecosystems
Soil physics – study of soil physical properties and processes.

Astrophysics – study of the physical aspects of celestial objects
Astronomy – studies the universe beyond Earth, including its formation and development, and the evolution, physics, chemistry, meteorology, and motion of celestial objects (such as galaxies, planets, etc.) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as the cosmic background radiation).
Astrodynamics – application of ballistics and celestial mechanics to the practical problems concerning the motion of rockets and other spacecraft.
Astrometry – branch of astronomy that involves precise measurements of the positions and movements of stars and other celestial bodies.
Extragalactic astronomy – branch of astronomy concerned with objects outside our own Milky Way Galaxy
Galactic astronomy – study of our own Milky Way galaxy and all its contents.
Physical cosmology – study of the largest-scale structures and dynamics of the universe and is concerned with fundamental questions about its formation and evolution.
Planetary science – scientific study of planets (including Earth), moons, and planetary systems, in particular those of the Solar System and the processes that form them.
Stellar astronomy – natural science that deals with the study of celestial objects (such as stars, planets, comets, nebulae, star clusters and galaxies) and phenomena that originate outside the atmosphere of Earth (such as cosmic background radiation)

Atmospheric physics – study of the application of physics to the atmosphere
Atomic, molecular, and optical physics – study of how matter and light interact
Biophysics – interdisciplinary science that uses the methods of physics to study biological systems
Medical physics – application of physics concepts, theories and methods to medicine.
Neurophysics – branch of biophysics dealing with the nervous system.

Chemical physics – branch of physics that studies chemical processes from the point of view of physics.
Classical physics - physics that predates the advent of quantum mechanics.
Computational physics – study and implementation of numerical algorithms to solve problems in physics for which a quantitative theory already exists.
Condensed matter physics – study of the physical properties of condensed phases of matter.
Cryogenics – cryogenics is the study of the production of very low temperature (below −150 °C, −238 °F or 123K) and the behavior of materials at those temperatures.
Dynamics – study of the causes of motion and changes in motion
Thermodynamics - the study of the relationships between heat and mechanical energy

Econophysics – interdisciplinary research field, applying theories and methods originally developed by physicists in order to solve problems in economics
Electromagnetism – branch of science concerned with the forces that occur between electrically charged particles.
Geophysics – the physics of the Earth and its environment in space; also the study of the Earth using quantitative physical methods
Homeokinetics - the physics of complex, self-organizing systems
Materials physics – use of physics to describe materials in many different ways such as force, heat, light and mechanics.
Mathematical physics – application of mathematics to problems in physics and the development of mathematical methods for such applications and for the formulation of physical theories.
Mechanics – branch of physics concerned with the behavior of physical bodies when subjected to forces or displacements, and the subsequent effects of the bodies on their environment.
Aerodynamics – study of the motion of air.
Biomechanics – study of the structure and function of biological systems such as humans, animals, plants, organs, and cells by means of the methods of mechanics.
Classical mechanics – one of the two major sub-fields of mechanics, which is concerned with the set of physical laws describing the motion of bodies under the action of a system of forces.
Kinematics – branch of classical mechanics that describes the motion of points, bodies (objects) and systems of bodies (groups of objects) without consideration of the causes of motion.

Continuum mechanics – branch of mechanics that deals with the analysis of the kinematics and the mechanical behavior of materials modeled as a continuous mass rather than as discrete particles.
Fluid mechanics – study of fluids and the forces on them.
Fluid statics – study of fluids at rest
Fluid kinematics – study of fluids in motion
Fluid dynamics – study of the effect of forces on fluid motion

Quantum mechanics – branch of physics which describes tiny discrete quantities of matter and energy, where action is on the order of Planck's constant.
Thermodynamics – branch of physical science concerned with heat and its relation to other forms of energy and work.

Nuclear physics – field of physics that studies the building blocks and interactions of atomic nuclei.
Optics – branch of physics which involves the behavior and properties of light, including its interactions with matter and the construction of instruments that use or detect it.
Particle physics – branch of physics that studies the properties and interactions of the fundamental constituents of matter and energy.
Psychophysics – quantitatively investigates the relationship between physical stimuli and the sensations and perceptions they affect.
Plasma physics – the study of plasma, a state of matter similar to gas in which a certain portion of the particles are ionized.
Polymer physics – field of physics that studies polymers, their fluctuations, mechanical properties, as well as the kinetics of reactions involving degradation and polymerisation of polymers and monomers respectively.
Quantum physics – branch of physics dealing with physical phenomena where the action is on the order of the Planck constant.
Relativity – theory of physics which describes the relationship between space and time.
Statics – branch of mechanics concerned with the analysis of loads (force, torque/moment) on physical systems in static equilibrium, that is, in a state where the relative positions of subsystems do not vary over time, or where components and structures are at a constant velocity.
Solid state physics – study of rigid matter, or solids, through methods such as quantum mechanics, crystallography, electromagnetism, and metallurgy.
Theoretical physics – the pursuit of describing physical phenomena with rigorous mathematical models and physical abstractions in order to analyze, explain, and predict natural processes.
Vehicle dynamics – dynamics of vehicles, here assumed to be ground vehicles.