Gravitational singularity – or spacetime singularity is a location where the quantities that are used to measure the gravitational field become infinite in a way that does not depend on the coordinate system.
Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems – set of results in general relativity which attempt to answer the question of when gravitation produces singularities.

Primordial black hole – hypothetical type of black hole that is formed not by the gravitational collapse of a large star but by the extreme density of matter present during the universe's early expansion.
Gravastar – object hypothesized in astrophysics as an alternative to the black hole theory by Pawel Mazur and Emil Mottola.
Dark star (Newtonian mechanics) – theoretical object compatible with Newtonian mechanics that, due to its large mass, has a surface escape velocity that equals or exceeds the speed of light.
Dark-energy star
Black star (semiclassical gravity) – gravitational object composed of matter.
Magnetospheric eternally collapsing object – proposed alternatives to black holes advocated by Darryl Leiter and Stanley Robertson.
Fuzzball (string theory) – theorized by some superstring theory scientists to be the true quantum description of black holes.
White hole – hypothetical region of spacetime which cannot be entered from the outside, but from which matter and light have the ability to escape.
Naked singularity – gravitational singularity without an event horizon.
Ring singularity – describes the altering gravitational singularity of a rotating black hole, or a Kerr black hole, so that the gravitational singularity becomes shaped like a ring.
Immirzi parameter – numerical coefficient appearing in loop quantum gravity, a nonperturbative theory of quantum gravity.
Membrane paradigm – useful "toy model" method or "engineering approach" for visualising and calculating the effects predicted by quantum mechanics for the exterior physics of black holes, without using quantum-mechanical principles or calculations.
Kugelblitz (astrophysics) – concentration of light so intense that it forms an event horizon and becomes self-trapped: according to general relativity, if enough radiation is aimed into a region, the concentration of energy can warp spacetime enough for the region to become a black hole .
Wormhole – hypothetical topological feature of spacetime that would be, fundamentally, a "shortcut" through spacetime.
Quasi-star – hypothetical type of extremely massive star that may have existed very early in the history of the Universe.
Black hole neural network