Out of approximately 120 million American workers, nearly 50 million are exempt from overtime laws (US Department of Labor, Wage and Hour Division, 1998). In 2004, the United States was 7th out of 24 OECD countries in terms of annual working hours per worker. (See Working time for a complete listing.) In 2015, the United States Department of Labor proposed dramatic changes to certain exemptions from federal minimum wage and overtime requirements. These changes are anticipated to take effect in July 2016, but as of January 2016, still are pending final approval. Proposed changes include: setting the minimum salary level required for exemption for full-time salaried workers at $970 per week, or $50,440 annually (an increase from the current $455 per week, or $23,660 annually) Increasing the total annual compensation required to exempt highly compensated employees to $122,148 annually (from the current $100,000 annually).
On August 23, 2004, President George W. Bush and the Department of Labor proposed changes to regulations governing implementation of the law. According to one study, the changes would have had significant impact on the number of workers covered by overtime laws and have exempted several million additional workers. The Bush administration maintained that the practical impact on working Americans would be minimal and that the changes would help clarify an outdated regulation. In particular, the new rules would have allowed more companies to offer flextime to their workers in lieu of overtime. The definition of exempt employees (ineligible for overtime) is regularly tested in the courts. A recent case is Encino Motorcars v. Navarro, which addresses the question of whether automobile dealer service advisors are eligible for overtime.
A company may harm themselves by docking a salaried employee for disciplinary reasons.

"Once pay is reduced using an hourly calculation, ... the employee is considered nonexempt, and so is every other worker in that job group."

Uber (company) is an example of a company that, in various jurisdictions, has encountered various legal problems regarding exemptions. The New York Times noted in 2017 that "Despite their appeal, the apps have faced a wave of criticism, including concerns over wheelchair accessibility and driver pay."