Single engine propeller aircraft
(As viewed by the pilot), the aircraft has a tendency to yaw to the left if using a clockwise turning propeller (right hand), and to the right with a counter-clockwise turning propeller (left hand). The clockwise turning propeller is by far the most common. The effect is most noticeable during the climb phase after take off and in flight conditions with high power and high angle of attack.
Multi engine propeller aircraft (clockwise rotation)
As with single engined aircraft, situations where the aircraft is at high power and has a high angle of attack (such as take off) will cause a slight, but noticeable yawing motion. The engine with the down-moving blades towards the wingtip produces more yaw and roll than the other engine, because the moment (arm) of that engine's thrust about the aircraft center of gravity is greater. Thus, the engine with down-moving blades towards the fuselage will be "critical", because its failure and the associated reliance on the other engine will require a larger rudder deflection by the pilot to maintain straight flight than if the other engine had failed. For most aircraft (which have clockwise rotating propellers), this is the left engine.
With engines rotating in the same direction the P-factor will affect VMC's, the minimum control speeds of the aircraft in asymmetric powered flight. The published VMC's are determined while the critical engine is inoperative. The actual VMC's after failure of any other engine is lower, safer, provided the pilot is aware of the limitations that apply with minimum control speeds.
Considering right-hand tractor engines (lines projecting from propeller discs represent the P-factor induced thrust lines):

At low speed flight with the left engine failed, the off-centre thrust produced by the right engine creates a larger yawing moment to left than the opposite case. The left engine in this scenario is the critical engine, namely the engine whose failure brings about the more adverse result. In the case of using counter-rotating engines (i.e., not rotating in the same direction) the P-factor is not considered in determining the critical engine (the engines are equally critical).
The asymmetric blade effect is dependent on thrust, and is proportional to forward velocity (specifically CAS) and, while generally insignificant during the initial ground roll for tail-wheel aircraft, will give a pronounced nose-left tendency during the later stages of the ground roll, particularly if the thrust axis is kept inclined to the flight path vector (i.e. tail-wheel in contact with runway). If a high angle of attack is used during the rotation (or indeed straight and level flight with high power and high angle of attack), then the effect can also be apparent. The effect is not so apparent during the landing, flare and rollout, given the relatively low power setting (propeller RPM). However, should the throttle be suddenly advanced with the tail-wheel in contact with the runway, then anticipation of this nose-left tendency is prudent.