In a p-process protons are added to stable or weakly radioactive atomic nuclei. If there is a high proton density in the stellar plasma, even short-lived radionuclides can capture one or more protons before they beta decay. This quickly moves the nucleosynthesis path from the region of stable nuclei to the very proton-rich side of the Chart of Nuclides. This is called rapid proton-capture.
Here, a series of (p,γ) reactions proceeds until either the beta decay of a nucleus is faster than a further proton capture, or the proton drip line is reached. Both cases lead to one or several sequential beta decays until a nucleus is produced which again can capture protons before it beta decays. Then the proton capture sequences continue.
It is possible to cover the region of the lightest nuclei up to 56Ni within a second because both proton captures and beta decays are fast. Starting with 56Ni, however, a number of waiting points are encountered in the reaction path. These are nuclides which both have relatively long half-lives (compared to the process timescale) and can only slowly add another proton (that is, their cross section for (p,γ) reactions is small). Examples for such waiting points are: 56Ni, 60Zn, 64Ge, 68Se. Further waiting points may be important, depending on the detailed conditions and location of the reaction path. It is typical for such waiting points to show half-lives of minutes to days. Thus, they considerably increase the time required to continue the reaction sequences. If the conditions required for this rapid proton capture are only present for a short time (the timescale of explosive astrophysical events is of the order of seconds), the waiting points limit or hamper the continuation of the reactions to heavier nuclei.
In order to produce p-nuclei, the process path has to encompass nuclides bearing the same mass number (but usually containing more protons) as the desired p-nuclei. These nuclides are then converted into p-nuclei through sequences of beta decays after the rapid proton captures ceased.
Variations of the main category rapid proton captures are the rp-, pn-, and νp-processes, which will be briefly outlined below.