In the United Kingdom, sport parachute rigger ratings are issued by the British Parachute Association's Rigging Committee, itself a subcommittee of the Safety and Training Committee. The BPA issues two working levels of riggers rating: Parachute Rigger and Advanced Rigger.
A Parachute Rigger is authorised to manufacture new components as listed in the BPA Parachute Rigger Manufacturing Syllabus. They are not cleared for harness manufacture or harness work, nor repair work or modifications to reserve canopies, reserve containers or reserve component parts.
An Advanced Rigger is cleared for all work on all sport parachute assemblies.
To become a BPA Parachute Rigger, first a candidate must become a BPA Advanced Packer, which certifies them to pack reserve parachutes. Following this they become a BPA Basic Rigger. This is their apprenticeship whereby they work under the supervision of an appropriately qualified rigger and where they gain experience manufacturing parachute component parts and repairing damaged parachutes and systems.Following this and a successful attendance on a BPA Parachute Rigger exam course, the candidate becomes a BPA Parachute Rigger.
The next level is a BPA Advanced Rigger,whereby Parachute Riggers of at least 2 years standing can attend a BPA Advanced Rigger course. This involves major repairs to canopies and container systems including harness work. In advance of the course, the candidate must also manufacture a full skydiving container system including component parts for assessment at the course.
Such courses are administered by at least two BPA Rigger Examiners. A Rigger Examiner is a BPA Advanced Rigger who has been successfully assessed on his ability to run Advanced Packer courses, Basic Rigger courses and Parachute Rigger courses.
The following documents record the criteria for examination and work limitations for each BPA Rigger rating –
Form 199 Basic Riggers Course syllabus
Form 200 Parachute Riggers Course Syllabus
Form 201 Advanced Riggers Course Syllabus
Form 202 Rigger Examiner Course Syllabus
Also of relevance are the following documents
Form 238 List of all BPA Rigging Related Documents
Form 169 Advanced Packing Course Syllabus