In electrical engineering, power represents the rate of electrical energy flowing into or out of a given component or control volume. Power is a signed quantity; negative power just represents power flowing in the opposite direction from positive power. From the standpoint of power flow, electrical components in a circuit can be divided into two types:
In a load or passive component, such as a light bulb, resistor, or electric motor, electric current (flow of positive charges) moves through the device under the influence of the electric field E in the direction of lower electric potential, from the positive terminal to the negative. So work is done by the charges on the component; potential energy flows out of the charges; and electric power flows from the circuit into the component, where it is converted to some other form of energy such as heat or mechanical work.
In a source or active component, such as a battery or electric generator, current is forced to move through the device in the direction of greater electric potential, from the negative to the positive voltage terminal. This increases the potential energy of the electric charges, so electric power flows out of the component into the circuit. Work must be done on the moving charges by some source of energy in the component, to make them move in this direction against the opposing force of the electric field E.
Some components can be either a source or a load, depending on the voltage or current through them. For example, a rechargeable battery acts as a source when it is used to produce power, but as a load when it is being recharged.
Since it can flow in either direction, there are two possible ways to define electric power; two possible reference directions: either power flowing into the circuit, or power flowing out of the circuit, can be defined as positive. Whichever is defined as positive, the other will be negative. The passive sign convention arbitrarily defines power flowing out of the circuit (into the component) as positive, so passive components have "positive" power flow.
In an AC (alternating current) circuit the current and voltage switch direction periodically, but the definitions above still apply; in passive components the current flows from the positive terminal to the negative, while in active components it flows the other direction.