If the formation of pebbles is slow, pebble accretion leads to the formation of a few gas giants in the outer Solar System. The formation of the gas giants is a long-standing problem in planetary science. The accretion of the cores of giant planets via the collision and mergers of planetesimals is slow and may be difficult to complete before the gas disk dissipates. (Although formation via planetesimal collisions can be accomplished within the typical lifetime of a protoplanetary disc.) The largest planetesimals can grow much faster via pebble accretion, but if the formation or delivery of pebbles is rapid numerous Earth-mass planets form instead of a few giant planet cores. As the largest objects approach Earth-mass the radius from which pebbles are accreted is limited by the Hill radius. This slows their growth relative to their neighbors (growth becomes oligarchic) and allows many objects to accrete similar masses of pebbles. However, if the formation or the delivery of pebbles is slow growth timescales becomes longer than the time required for gravitationally stirring. The largest planetesimals then excite the inclinations and eccentricities of the smaller planetesimals. Their inclined orbits keep small planetesimals outside of the narrow disk of pebbles during most of their orbits, limiting their growth. The period of runaway growth is then extended and the largest objects are able to accrete a sizable fraction of the pebbles and grow into giant planet cores. As the cores grow larger some reach masses sufficient to create partial gaps in the gas disk, altering its pressure gradient and blocking the inward drift of pebbles. Accretion of pebbles is then halted and the gas envelope surrounding the core cools and collapses allowing for the rapid accretion of gas and the formation of a gas giant. Cores that do not grow massive enough to clear gaps in the pebble disk are only able to accrete small gas envelopes and instead become ice giants. The rapid growth via pebble accretion allows the cores to grow large enough to accrete massive gas envelopes forming gas giants while avoiding migrating very close to the star. In simulations cold gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn can form via pebble accretion if their initial embryos began growing beyond 20 AU. This distant formation offers a potential explanation for Jupiter's enrichment in noble gases. However, dedicated formation models indicate that it is difficult to reconcile growth via pebble accretion with the final mass and composition of the solar system ice giants Uranus and Neptune.