Prior to the Pennsylvania Anatomy Act being passed in 1883, many other dissection acts were passed in America. These acts included the Massachusetts Act of 1784, which stated that those that died or were executed due to dueling may be dissected. The next act was an act in New York called An Act to Prevent the Odious Practice of Digging up and Removing, for the Purpose of Dissection, Dead Bodies Interred in Cemeteries or Burial Places. This act was one of the first acts in America to prevent grave robbing for dissection, the first section says that anyone convicted of removing a dead body for the purpose of dissection, intending to dissect, dissecting or assisting with the dissection shall suffer consequences. So that learning about anatomy using dissection is not harmed when someone is convicted of murder, arson, or burglary they are then either sentenced to death, and the judges may decide that the offender's body be used for dissection or their body is buried. Then in 1831 Massachusetts passed an act saying that the bodies of the unclaimed deceased be delivered to the anatomists, under certain restrictions. In 1835 Missouri allowed executed slaves along with convicted criminal's bodies to be dissected. The 1854 Bone Bill in New York allowed the unclaimed bodies of criminals or the homeless to be sent to medical schools.
In 1867 the city of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania and the county of Allegheny in Pennsylvania, passed an act, that gave each medical school, in the public and private sectors, within Philadelphia and Allegheny county Pennsylvania the same amount of unclaimed bodies per student. Therefore, a larger medical school would get more bodies than a small school of 20 students, such as if a school were to have 200 medical students they would get 50 bodies, but if a school were to have 25 medical students they would receive 12-13 bodies. If a person claimed that they wanted to be buried prior to death, then their body would not be allowed to be given to these medical schools, they would instead be buried despite being unclaimed. Another part of this act punished the anatomists if they were caught selling the spare bodies or spare body parts, the same punishment applied for the grave robbers and someone caught buying the spare bodies or spare body parts. This act later on was made into seven sections and would include all of the counties of Pennsylvania, instead of one county and a major city, and would become what we know today as the Pennsylvania Anatomy Act of 1883.