The body of a human listener obstructs incoming sound waves, causing linear filtering of the sound signal due to interference from the head, ears, and body. Humans use dynamic cues to reinforce localization. These arise from active, sometimes unconscious, motions of the listener, which change the relative position of the source. It is reported that front/back confusions which are common in static listening tests disappear when listeners are allowed to slightly turn their heads to help them in localization. However, if the sound scene is presented through headphones without compensation for head motion, the scene does not change with the user’s motion, and dynamic cues are absent.
Head-related transfer functions contain all the descriptors of localization cues such as ITD and IID as well as monaural cues. Every HRTF uniquely represents the transfer of sound from a specific position in 3D space to the ears of a listener. The decoding process performed by the auditory system can be imitated using an artificial setup consisting of two microphones, two artificial ears and a HRTF database. To determine the position of an audio source in 3D space, the ear input signals are convolved with the inverses of all possible HRTF pairs, where the correct inverse maximizes cross-correlation between the convolved right and left signals. In the case of multiple simultaneous sound sources, the transmission of sound from source to ears can be considered a multiple-input and multiple-output. Here, the HRTFs the source signals were filtered with en route to the microphones can be found using methods such as convolutive blind source separation, which has the advantage of efficient implementation in real-time systems. Overall, these approaches using HRTFs can be well optimized to localize multiple moving sound sources. The average human has the remarkable ability to locate a sound source with better than 5◦ accuracy in both azimuth and elevation, in challenging environments.


== References ==