Marx, Redding and Simmons and McInnes calculated that the energy conversion efficiency of terrestrial laser-driven propulsion is approximately proportional to v/c at low speeds (v<0.1c), thus is small at low speeds (v<<0.1c). However, at higher speeds (v>0.1c), owing to the favorable Doppler shift energy transfer, onboard photon propulsion becomes much more energy efficient.

Photons transfer their energy to the spacecraft by redshifting due to Doppler shift upon reflection, thus the higher the spacecraft speed, the higher the efficiency. The figure shows the energy transfer efficiency from photons to the spacecraft's kinetic energy as a function of β=v/c (the spacecraft velocity divided by the light velocity) in photon propulsion. As the spacecraft velocity approaches the light velocity (v≈c), the efficiency of photon propulsion approaches 100%, as if the spacecraft acts like a black hole in the moving direction. The lower solid curve in the figure represents the efficiency of conventional photon rocket or sail with photon recycling. The upper solid line represents schematically an example the efficiency of a recycling photon rocket, such as a PLT. At low β, the recycling rocket can have a high thrust amplification factor (in this example, ~3,000), however as β approaches 1, the amplification factor converges to 1 and the overhead of recycling is unneeded. Therefore, these rockets are projected to bridge the efficiency gap.

The simplest recycling scheme is a Herriot cell with multi-bouncing laser beams between two high reflectance mirrors that do not form a resonant optical cavity as illustrated in Figure 4. This cell type approach was first proposed by Meyer, et al., followed by Simmons and McInnes. Mertzger and Landis proposed a multi-bounce lightsail craft, such that the beam is reflected back and forth between the lightsail and a source reflector. Advanced reflectors permit more than 1000 bounces, reducing power requirements by 1000x compared to single bounce proposals. Using 100 MW to 1 GW lasers, a sub-100 day Mars transit is possible. The first experimental attempt on photon thrust amplification in a non-resonant Herriot-cell type optical cavity was performed by Gray et al. who obtained amplified photon thrust of ~0.4 µN with a 300-W laser and a photon thrust amplification factor of ~2.6.
The passive resonator in the Fabry-Perot interferometer has been extensively used in high-sensitivity optical detection methods, such as the cavity ring-down spectroscopy. One experiment produced 20,000 photon bounces using mirrors with 0.99995 reflectance. in which even one nanometer perturbation in cavity length destroys the resonance and nulls the photon thrust. The injection of laser power into the cavity remains challenging.
Meyer et al. concluded that for interstellar flights, recycling photon propulsion vehicles are much more energy efficient than an onboard photon rocket, such as the nuclear photonic rocket. They proposed possible applications of photon recycling using passive resonant optical cavities (lasers outside the optical cavity), such as the Laser Elevator.