If the photonic laser thruster is scalable for the use in such main space propulsion, multiple photonic laser thrusters can be used to construct a photonic railway that has been proposed as a potential permanent transport infrastructure for interplanetary or interstellar commutes, allowing the transport craft themselves to carry very little or no fuel. The photonic railway was investigated for a space applications involving planets, moons and asteroids both in the solar system and other star systems, such as mining and setting up permanent habitation, with regular interplanetary and interstellar travel.
For example, platforms could be built in Earth orbit and then used for constructing further platforms at one of the Lagrange points of a planet of interest. For Mars, solar power is still strong, thus solar pumped platforms could be operated near Mars. Planets farther from the sun might not support solar pumping, and the railway would involve two PLT-BLP systems near Earth.
Bae compared the energy need to speed spacecraft for conventional rockets and that for photonic railway or PLT-BLP, in terms of specific energy (J/kg) that is the energy required for propelling a unit mass to a given velocity. Fig. 11 shows examples of the specific energy (J/kg) as a function of the spacecraft velocity (km/s) related with the Mars photonic railway. Two curves represent the specific energies for conventional rockets with Isp = 500 s and 3,000 s, respectively. The upper straight solid line represents the specific energy for BLP and the lower straight solid line for photonic railway or PLT-BLP with M=1,000. Here M is the photon thrust amplification factor. It is interesting that BPL becomes more energy efficient than rockets with Isp=500 s, if the travel time needs to be shorter than 1 month. BPL becomes more energy efficient than rockets with Isp=3,000 s, if the travel time is shorter than a week. However, photonic railway or PLT-BPL with M=1,000 becomes more energy efficient than rockets with Isp=500 s, if the travel time needs to be shorter than 2 month. BPL becomes more energy efficient than rockets with Isp=3,000 s, if the travel time needs to be shorter than two weeks. Eventually, when the flight time needs to be 3 days, for example, both BLP and photonic railway or PLT-BLP are more energy efficient than rockets with Isp=3,000 s. This estimate demonstrates photonic railway is potentially the most energy efficient way to commute to planets in the solar system.
One interesting aspect of the Spacetrain on the photonic railway was realized that the continuous low level acceleration of up to 1 g will create an artificial gravity that may eliminate or minimize the health effects of weightlessness long term space travel in zero-gravity environment. This artificial gravity will play a crucial role in reducing or eliminating the health problems arising from the typical zero-g space travel environment.
A simple PLT system could provide continuous and constant thrust in a straight line. However, travel around the solar system involves interacting with planets and the sun, so trajectories and travel time calculations are more complex. Fu-Yuen Hsiao has investigated the trajectories of spacecraft relying entirely on a PLT.
Bae's investigation concluded that the development of interplanetary and interstellar photonic railway will require development of the ways to utilize Photon Bose Einstein Condensation or diffraction-minimized laser beam propagation with non-diffracting beams, such as Bessel beam, or x-ray lasers and future advanced material science and technologies. Bae further concluded that the realization of the interstellar photonic railway would require that the PLT technology developments ride on the Moore’s law as the 20th century silicon devices did.