Up to now the photon structure function has only been investigated experimentally by electron scattering off a beam of quasi-real photons. The experiments utilize the so-called two-photon reactions at electron-positron colliders e−e+ → e−e++ h, where h includes all hadrons of the final state. The kinematics chosen is characterized by the electron scattered at large angles and the positron at very small angles thus providing a calculable flux of quasi-real photons (Weizsäcker-Williams approximation). The cross section for electron-photon scattering is then analyzed in terms of the photon structure function quite analogously to studies of the nucleon structure in electron-nucleon scattering.
In order to ensure a small virtual mass of the target photon one uses the so-called anti-tagging. Special forward detectors are arranged down to small angles close to the beam pipe. Events with a positron signal in these detectors are eliminated from the analysis. By contrast, events with the positrons travelling undetected down the beam pipe, are accepted. The energy of the emitted quasi-real target photon is unknown. Whereas the four-momentum transfer squared Q2 can be determined alone from the energy and angle of the scattered electron, x has to be calculated from Q2 and the invariant mass W of the hadronic system using x = Q2/(Q2+W2). The experimental situation is thus comparable to neutrino-nucleon scattering where the unknown energy of the incoming neutrino also requires the determination of W for calculating the kinematical parameters of the neutrino quark scattering process.

The hadronic system produced in two-photon reactions has in general a rather high momentum along the beam direction resulting in small hadronic scattering angles. This kinematic feature again requires special forward detectors. A high efficiency in reconstructing hadronic events is now also essential. Nevertheless losses of hadronic energy are practically unavoidable and the real hadronic energy is therefore determined using sophisticated unfolding techniques.
The first measurement of the photon structure function has been performed using the detector PLUTO at the DESY storage ring PETRA  followed subsequently by many investigations at all large electron-positron colliders. A comprehensive discussion of data and theory can be found in reviews of 2000  and 2014. It is customary to display the structure function in units of the fine-structure constant α. The basic theoretical features discussed above are impressively verified by the data. The increase of F2γ (x,Q2) with x, shown in Fig. 2 at Q2 = 4.3 GeV2 and 39.7 GeV2, is obviously quite different from the behaviour of the proton structure function, which falls with rising x, and it demonstrates nicely the influence of the photon splitting to quark pairs. The predicted log Q2 dependence of F2 (x,Q2) is clearly demonstrated in Fig. 3, here plotted for data with 0.3 < x < 0.5.

In both figures the data are compared to theoretical calculations, the curves representing the analysis of photon structure function data based on the standard higher-order QCD prediction for three light quarks  supplemented by the charm quark contribution and a residual hadronic component accounted for by vector meson dominance. The numerical values were calculated using Λ = 0.338 GeV and a charm quark mass of 1.275 GeV. See for details of the data selection and the theoretical model.
One might be tempted to use the data for a precision measurement of Λ. However, while the asymptotic solution, defined properly at higher order, appears superficially very sensitive to Λ, spurious singularities at small x require either technical ad-hoc regularizations or the switching to the evolution from pre-fixed initial conditions at small Q2. Both techniques reduce the sensitivity to Λ. Nevertheless, values of





α

s


(

M

Z


)
=
0.1198
±
0.0028
(
e
x
)
±
0.0040
(
t
h
)


{\displaystyle \alpha _{s}(M_{Z})=0.1198\pm 0.0028(ex)\pm 0.0040(th)}

in analyses of the QCD coupling along these lines  agree well with other experimental methods.
It is remarkable to realize that even a single parameter (Λ) fit performed to all data with x > 0.45, Q2 > 59 GeV2 or to all data with x > 0.1 leads to very similar results for αS (MZ).