Assuming the gun and shooter are at rest, the force on the bullet is equal to that on the gun-shooter. This is due to Newton's third law of motion (For every action, there is an equal and opposite reaction). Consider a system where the gun and shooter have a combined mass M and the bullet has a mass m. When the gun is fired, the two systems move away from one another with new velocities V and v respectively. But the law of conservation of momentum states that the magnitudes of their momenta must be equal:




M
V
+
m
v
=
0

(
1
)


{\displaystyle MV+mv=0\qquad (1)}

Since force equals the rate of change in momentum and the initial momenta are zero, the force on the bullet must therefore be the same as the force on the gun/shooter.
Gunshot victims frequently fall or collapse when shot; this is less a result of the momentum of the bullet pushing them over, but is primarily caused by physical damage or psychological effects, perhaps combined with being off balance. This is not the case if the victim is hit by heavier projectiles such as 20 mm cannon shell, where the momentum effects can be enormous; this is why very few such weapons can be fired without being mounted on a weapons platform or involve a recoilless system (e.g. a recoilless rifle).
Example: A .44 Remington Magnum with a 240-grain (0.016 kg) jacketed bullet is fired at 1,180 feet per second (360 m/s) at a 170-pound (77 kg) target. What velocity is imparted to the target (assume the bullet remains embedded in the target and thus practically loses all its velocity)?
Let mb and vb stand for the mass and velocity of the bullet, the latter just before hitting the target, and let mt and vt stand for the mass and velocity of the target after being hit. Conservation of momentum requires
mbvb = mtvt.
Solving for the target's velocity gives
vt = mbvb / mt = 0.016 kg × 360 m/s / 77 kg = 0.07 m/s = 0.269 kmph.
This example shows the target barely moves at all. That's not to say one couldn't stop a train by firing bullets at it, it's just completely impractical.