The broad goal of the physics education research (PER) community is to understand the processes involved in the teaching and learning of physics through rigorous scientific investigation.
According to the University of Washington PER group (one of the pioneers in the field), work within PER tends to fall within one or more of several broad descriptions, including:
identifying student difficulties
developing methods to address these difficulties and measure learning gains
developing surveys to measure student performance and other characteristics
investigating student attitudes and beliefs as relating to physics
studying small and large group dynamics analyzing student patterns using framing and other new and existing epistemological methods
“An Introduction to Physics Education Research”, by Robert Beichner, identified 8 trends in PER as follows
Conceptual understanding: Investigation of what students know and how they learn it. Early research involved identifying and treating “misconceptions” about physics principles (e.g. “A heavier object will fall faster than a lighter object” or “acceleration is always zero when velocity is zero”). The term has since evolved to “student difficulties” based on consideration of alternative theoretical frameworks for student learning on a cognitive level such as resource theory which would refine the idea of what was meant by “conceptual change”. (That is, a difficulty with a concept can be built into a correct concept; in contrast, a misconception needs to be rooted out and replaced by a correct conception.) The PER group at the University of Washington specializes in research about conceptual understanding and student difficulty.
Epistemology: Physics Education Research began as a trial-and-error approach to improve learning (something most teachers are familiar with). Because of the downsides of such an approach, theoretical bases for research were developed early on, most notable through the University of Maryland. The theoretical underpinnings of PER are mostly built around a Piagettean constructivism. Theories on cognition in physics learning were put forward by Redish, Hammer, Elby and Scherr, who built off of diSessa's “Knowledge in Pieces”. The Resources Framework, developed from this work, is notable, which builds off of research in neuroscience, sociology, linguistics, education and psychology. Additional frameworks are forthcoming, most recently the “Possibilities Framework”
which builds off of deductive reasoning research started by Wason and Johnson-Laird.
Problem Solving: Everyone who has taken a physics course understands the emphasis on problem solving via the hoardes of “end-of-chapter” exercises in a given textbook. This is for good reason, as problem solving plays an important role in the processes by which the fields of physics research are advanced. Most research in this area rests on examining the difference between novice and expert problem solvers (freshman/sophomores and graduate level/postdoctorate students, respectively). Approaches in researching problem solving have been a focus for the University of Minnesota's PER group. Recently, a paper was published in PRL Special Section: PER which identified over 30 behaviors, attitudes and skills that are utilized in the solving of a typical physics problem. The implication of this is that greater resolution and specific attention to the details is needed in the field of problem solving: its too general to study on its own, without consideration to the components.
Attitudes: The University of Colorado developed an instrument which reveals student attitudes and expectations about physics as a subject and as a class. Student attitudes are often found to decline after traditional instruction, but recent work by Redish and Hammer show that this can be reversed and positive attitudinal gains seen if attention is paid to "explicate the epistemological elements of the implicit curriculum"
Social Aspects: Significant research has been conducted into gender, race, and other socioeconomic issues that can influence learning, not just in physics, but in any field. Additionally, research into the social aspects of learning such as body language, group dynamics (versus solitary learning) and even classroom set up (lecture hall, lab setting, or round tables?) and how these factors affect the learning of physics.
Technology: Student response systems (“Clickers”) are based on Eric Mazur's work in Peer Instruction. Some research in PER examines the influence, applications of, and possibilities for technology in the classroom.
Instructional Interventions, Materials, and their evaluation: Perhaps the most productive outcropping of the PER community is the development of curricula design based on more than two decades of research in physics education. The Tutorials in Physics, Physics by Inquiry, Investigative Science Learning Environment, and Paradigms in Physics are notable, as well as the multitude of new textbooks in introductory and junior level coursework. (For example, for intro classes, Etkina and Van Heuvelen, Knight, Mazur, and for junior level quantum mechanics, McIntyre.) The Kansas State University Physics Education Research Group has developed a program, Visual Quantum Mechanics (VQM), to teach quantum mechanics to high school and college students who do not have advanced backgrounds in physics or math.1.