The clustering of the orbits of extreme trans-Neptunian objects and raising of their perihelia is reproduced in simulations that include Planet Nine. In simulations conducted by Batygin and Brown swarms of large semi-major axis scattered disk objects that began with random orientations were sculpted into roughly collinear groups of spatially confined orbits by a massive distant planet in a highly eccentric orbit. These surviving objects, about 10% of the population with initial semi-major axes of 250–550 AU, were in orbits that were oriented with their long axes anti-aligned with respect to the massive planet and were roughly co-planar with it. The objects were also found to be in resonance with the massive planet. The resonances included high-order resonances, for example 27:17, and were interconnected, yielding an orbital evolution that was fundamentally chaotic, causing their semi-major axes to vary unpredictably on million-year timescales. The perihelia of these objects were also raised temporarily, producing Sedna-like orbits, before being returned to orbits more typical of typical trans-Neptunian objects after several hundred million years. Some of the eTNOs also evolved into orbits perpendicular to the plane of the Solar System, which Batygin and Brown later discovered had also been observed. Similar results also occur if simulations began with the objects initially interacting with multiple planets, like in various versions of the Nice model. Lawler et al. and Nesvorny et al. both found that objects scattered outward by the giant planets would be captured in a cloud centered around Planet Nine's semi-major axis with most objects at greater semi-major axis. A significant fraction of these objects had inclinations of greater than 60°, and for an initial 20 Earth mass planetesimal disk roughly 0.3–0.4 Earth masses remained in the Planet Nine cloud at the end of a 4 billion year simulation.
Batygin and Brown found that the distribution of the orbits of known extreme trans-Neptunian objects is best reproduced in simulations using a 10 M⊕ planet in the following orbit:
semi-major axis a ≈ 700 AU, orbital period 18,000 years
eccentricity e ≈ 0.6, perihelion ≈ 280 AU, aphelion ≈ 1,120 AU
inclination i ≈ 30° to the ecliptic
longitude of the ascending node Ω ≈ 94°.
argument of perihelion ω ≈ 139° and longitude of perihelion ϖ = 235°±12°
This orbit results in strong anti-alignment beyond 250 AU, weak alignment between 150 AU and 250 AU, and little effect inside 150 AU. Anti-alignment occurs with variable success using a semi-major axis between 400 AU and 1500 AU and an eccentricity between 0.5 and 0.8. Anti-alignment weakens as Planet Nine's inclination is increased. Simulations conducted by Becker et al. found a similar range for the stability of eTNOs, semi-major axes ranging from 500 to 1200 AU and eccentricities ranging from 0.3 to 0.6 with lower eccentricities being favored at smaller semi-major axes. They noted that while stability was favored with smaller eccentricities, anti-alignment was more likely at higher eccentricities near the borders of stability. Lawler et al. found that the population captured was smaller in simulations with a planet in a circular orbit which also produced few high inclination objects.