Much like the rest of the Planck units, there is currently no proven physical significance of the Planck length. Gravity theorists consider the Planck length to be the quantization of space that makes up the fabric of the universe, also referred to as quantum foam.
The Planck length is believed to be the shortest meaningful length, the limiting distance below which the very notions of space and length cease to exist. Any attempt to investigate the possible existence of shorter distances, by performing higher-energy collisions, would inevitably result in black hole production. Higher-energy collisions, rather than splitting matter into finer pieces, would simply produce bigger black holes.
In some forms of quantum gravity, the Planck length is the length scale at which the structure of spacetime becomes dominated by quantum effects, and it is impossible to determine the difference between two locations less than one Planck length apart.

The Planck area, equal to the square of the Planck length, plays a role in black hole entropy. The value of this entropy, in units of the Boltzmann constant, is known to be given by



A

/

(
4

ℓ


P



2


)


{\displaystyle A/(4\ell _{\mathrm {P} }^{2})}
, where A is the area of the event horizon. The Planck area is the area by which the surface of a spherical black hole increases when the black hole swallows one bit of information, as was proven by Jacob Bekenstein.
If large extra dimensions exist, the measured strength of gravity may be much smaller than its true (small-scale) value. In this case the Planck length would have no fundamental physical significance, and quantum gravitational effects would appear at other scales.
In string theory, the Planck length is the order of magnitude of the oscillating strings that form elementary particles, and shorter lengths do not make physical sense. The string scale ls is related to the Planck scale by ℓP = gs1/4ls, where gs is the string coupling constant. Contrary to what the name suggests, the string coupling constant is not constant, but depends on the value of a scalar field known as the dilaton.
In loop quantum gravity, area is quantized, and the Planck area is, within a factor of 10, the smallest possible area value.
In doubly special relativity, the Planck length is observer-invariant.
The search for the laws of physics valid at the Planck length is a part of the search for the theory of everything.