One commonly used similarity transformation was derived for gas discharges by James Dillon Cobine (1941), Alfred Hans von Engel and Max Steenbeck (1934),. They can be summarised as follows:
This scaling applies best to plasmas with a relatively low degree of ionization. In such plasmas, the ionization energy of the neutral atoms is an important parameter and establishes an absolute energy scale, which explains many of the scalings in the table:
Since the masses of electrons and ions cannot be varied, the velocities of the particles are also fixed, as is the speed of sound.
If velocities are constant, then time scales must be directly proportional to distance scales.
In order that charged particles falling through an electric potential gain the same energy, the potentials must be invariant, implying that the electric field scales inversely with the distance.
Assuming that the magnitude of the E-cross-B drift is important and should be invariant, the magnetic field must scale like the electric field, namely inversely with the size. This is also the scaling required by Faraday's law of induction and Ampère's law.
Assuming that the speed of the Alfvén wave is important and must remain invariant, the ion density (and with it the electron density) must scale with B2, that is, inversely with the square of the size. Considering that the temperature is fixed, this also ensures that the ratio of thermal to magnetic energy, known as beta, remains constant. Furthermore, in regions where quasineutrality is violated, this scaling is required by Gauss's law.
Ampère's law also requires that current density scales inversely with the square of the size, and therefore that current itself is invariant.
The electrical conductivity is current density divided by electric field and thus scales inversely with the length.
In a partially ionized plasma, the electrical conductivity is proportional to the electron density and inversely proportional to the neutral gas density, implying that the neutral density must scale inversely with the length, and ionization fraction scales inversely with the length.