The Sun appears to move northward during the northern spring, contacting the celestial equator on the March equinox. Its declination reaches a maximum equal to the angle of Earth's axial tilt (23.44°) on the June solstice, then decreases until reaching its minimum (-23.44°) on the December solstice, when its value is the negative of the axial tilt. This variation produces the seasons.
A line graph of the Sun's declination during a year resembles a sine wave with an amplitude of 23.44°, but one lobe of the wave is several days longer than the other, among other differences.
The following phenomena would occur if Earth is a perfect sphere, in a circular orbit around the Sun, and if its axis is tilted 90°, so that the axis itself is on the orbital plane (similar to Uranus). At one date in the year, the Sun would be directly overhead at the North Pole, so its declination would be +90°. For the next few months, the subsolar point would move toward the South Pole at constant speed, crossing the circles of latitude at a constant rate, so that the solar declination would decrease linearly with time. Eventually, the Sun would be directly above the South Pole, with a declination of -90°; then it would start to move northward at a constant speed. Thus, the graph of solar declination, as seen from this highly tilted Earth, would resemble a triangle wave rather than a sine wave, zigzagging between plus and minus 90°, with linear segments between the maxima and minima.
If the 90° axial tilt is decreased, then the absolute maximum and minimum values of the declination would decrease, to equal the axial tilt. Also, the shapes of the maxima and minima on the graph would become less acute ("pointy"), being curved to resemble the maxima and minima of a sine wave. However, even when the axial tilt equals that of the actual Earth, the maxima and minima remain more acute than those of a sine wave.
In reality, Earth's orbit is elliptical. Earth moves more rapidly around the Sun near perihelion, in early January, than near aphelion, in early July. This makes processes like the variation of the solar declination happen faster in January than in July. On the graph, this makes the minima more acute than the maxima. Also, since perihelion and aphelion do not happen on the exact dates as the solstices, the maxima and minima are slightly asymmetrical. The rates of change before and after are not quite equal.
The graph of apparent solar declination is therefore different in several ways from a sine wave. Calculating it accurately involves some complexity, as shown below.