The empirical literature shows mixed evidence on the significance of the precautionary motive for saving. Numerical simulations suggested the possibility precautionary saving, ranging from 20 to 60 percent of all saving. A significant empirical contribution by Brumberg (1956), showed that savings in the current period were seen statistically significant to bridge the gap between current income and the highest previously earned income. Hence, saving was considered a significant hedge against the income fluctuations.
An attempt to quantify the impact of idiosyncratic risk on saving was led by Aiyagari (1994). Insurance market incompleteness was introduced by assuming a large number of individuals who receive idiosyncratic labor income shocks that are uninsured. This model allows for the individuals’ time preference rate to differ from the markets’ interest rate. Findings of the model showed that lower variability of earnings led to a lower saving rate. Also, the saving rate became higher by a range of 7% to 14% as variability of earnings increased.
The analysis also accounted for the case where market interest rate was higher than the subjective rate of time preference, and provided evidence that individuals will postpone consumption and save by accumulating large stocks of assets. When both rates were equal, given an anticipated shock to the labor income, a rational individual would hold a large stock of assets to hedge for the income risk. The paper also shows analytically that when the interest rate is lower than the time preference rate, individuals would accumulate savings.
Dardanoni (1991) proposed that high rates of precautionary saving would simply be implausible, as most saving should come from the top percentiles of the income distribution—i.e., individuals who are not very likely to engage in precautionary saving. Browning and Lusardi (1996) concluded based on the empirical literature that while the precautionary motive is important for some people at some times, it is unlikely to be so for most people. In other words, the heterogeneity of consumption/saving behavior of individuals in the economy makes it difficult to precisely quantify the precautionary motive for saving.
Moreover, insuring industrial workers’ future incomes against workplace accident was used to test the effect of insurance on precautionary savings. This was conducted for 7000 households who did not or could not obtain complete insurance coverage against workplace accident risk, covering 1917-1919. Industrial workers at the time significantly reduced their saving and insurance consumption by approximately 25 percent when their expected post accident benefits increased.
Subsequent analysis from Kazarosian (1997), using data from the National Longitudinal Survey, has shown that a doubling of uncertainty increases the ratio of wealth to permanent income by 29%. In addition, surveys have shown that most Americans desire precautionary savings at 8% of total net worth and 20% of total financial wealth.
Ventura and Eisenhauer (2005) argue that the reason behind lack of consensus of empirical work on the magnitude of precautionary savings is due to the lack of suitable data, and of a good proxy for future income variability.
Because of higher quality data on hours worked, a new literature considered precautionary labor supply, a part of precautionary savings. The findings support modest precautionary saving, which is particularly relevant for self-employed. If the self-employed faced the same wage risk as the civil servants, their hours of work would be reduced by 4.5%.