The chief feasibility issue of Valkyrie (or for any antimatter-beam drive) lies in its requirement of quantities of antimatter fuel measured in tons. Antimatter cannot be produced at an efficiency of more than 50% (that is to say, to produce one gram of antimatter requires twice as much energy as you would get from annihilating that gram with a gram of matter). Since a half a kilogram of antimatter would yield 9×1016 J if annihilated with an equal amount of matter, this quickly adds up to enormous energy requirements for its production. To produce the 50 tons of antimatter Valkyrie would require 1.8×1022 J. This is the same amount of energy that the entire human race currently uses in about forty years.
This may be solved by creating a truly enormous power plant for the antimatter factory, probably in the form of a vast array of solar panels with a combined area of millions of square kilometers or many fusion reactors. Alternately the antimatter-fusion hybrid drive the Valkyrie uses to accelerate up to 0.2 c would require much less antimatter and, with an exhaust velocity of 30-60,000 km·s−1, still compares quite favorably with competing engines such as the inertial confinement pulse drive used by Project Daedalus or Project Orion. The Valkyrie's lightweight construction could also be applied to a wide variety of space vehicle.
By using tethers there is no rigidity between ship elements and engines. Without active acceleration or thrust to pull and straighten the tethers the slightest imbalance, excess force, or the moving of the ship elements into different flight configurations pose a danger for collisions between ship elements and engines. As long term space flight at interstellar velocities causes erosion due to collision with particles, gas, dust and micrometeorites the tethers are literally lifelines. Changing course or turning the ship requires re-positioning or aligning every ship element and presumably consumes more fuel in doing so.
As the liquid droplet radiators (LDR) are deployed on the other side of propulsion and the main body, the droplets and the collectors are exposed to the other half of heat energy from the gamma radiation from the antimatter annihilation. If the total area of the collectors are larger than the radiation shield the LDR would serve to cool itself rather than the shield for the ship's main components.