Boil-off of cryogenic propellants in space may be mitigated by both technological solutions as well as system-level planning and design. From a technical perspective: for a propellant depot with passive insulation system to effectively store cryogenic fluids, boil-off caused by heating from solar and other sources must be mitigated, eliminated, or used for economic purposes. For non-cryogenic propellants, boil-off is not a significant design problem.
Boil off rate is governed by heat leakage and by the quantity of propellant in the tanks. With partially filled tanks, the percentage loss is higher. Heat leakage depends on surface area, while the original mass of propellant in the tanks depends on volume. So by the cube-square law, the smaller the tank, the faster the liquids will boil off. Some propellant tank designs have achieved a liquid hydrogen boil off rate as low as approximately 0.13% per day (3.8% per month) while the much higher temperature cryogenic fluid of liquid oxygen would boil off much less, about 0.016% per day (0.49% per month).
It is possible to achieve zero boil-off (ZBO) with cryogenic propellant storage using an active thermal control system. Tests conducted at the NASA Lewis Research Center's Supplemental Multilayer Insulation Research Facility (SMIRF) over the summer of 1998 demonstrated that a hybrid thermal control system could eliminate boiloff of cryogenic propellants. The hardware consisted of a pressurized 50-ft³ (ca. 1416 litres) tank insulated with 34 layers of multi-layer insulation (MLI), a condenser, and a Gifford-McMahon (GM) cryocooler that has a cooling capacity of 15 to 17.5 watt (W). Liquid hydrogen was the test fluid. The test tank was installed into a vacuum chamber, simulating space vacuum. In 2001, a cooperative effort by NASA's Ames Research Center, Glenn Research Center, and Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) was implemented to develop zero-boiloff concepts for in-space cryogenic storage. Main program element was a large-scale, zero-boiloff demonstration using the MSFC multipurpose hydrogen test bed (MHTB) - 18.10 m3 LH2 tank (about 1300 kg of H2). A commercial cryocooler was interfaced with an existing MHTB spray bar mixer and insulation system in a manner that enabled a balance between incoming and extracted thermal energy.
Another NASA study in June 2003 for conceptual Mars mission showed mass savings over traditional, passive- only cryogenic storage when mission durations are 5 days in LEO for oxygen, 8.5 days for methane and 64 days for hydrogen. Longer missions equate to greater mass savings. Cryogenic xenon saves mass over passive storage almost immediately. When power to run the ZBO is already available, the break-even mission durations are even shorter, e.g. about a month for hydrogen. The larger the tank, the fewer days in LEO when ZBO has reduced mass.
In addition to technical solutions to the challenge of excessive boil-off of cryogenic rocket propellants, system-level solutions have been proposed. From a systems perspective, reductions in the standby time of the LH2 cryogenic storage in order to achieve, effectively, a just in time (JIT) delivery to each customer, matched with the balanced refinery technology to split the long-term storable feedstock—water—into the stoichiometric LOX/LH2 necessary, is theoretically capable of achieving a system-level solution to boil-off. Such proposals have been suggested as supplementing good technological techniques to reduce boil-off, but would not replace the need for efficient technological storage solutions.