Both theoretical studies and funded development projects that are currently underway provide answers to the "Are propellant depots feasible?" question. Studies have shown that a depot-centric architecture with smaller launch vehicles could be US$57 billion less expensive than a heavy-lift architecture over a 20-year time frame. The cost of large launch vehicles is so high that a depot able to hold the propellant lifted by two or more medium-sized launch vehicles may be cost effective and support more payload mass on beyond-Earth orbit trajectories.
In a 2010 NASA study, an additional flight of a "Ares V heavy" launch vehicle was required to stage a US government Mars reference mission due to 70 tons of boiloff, assuming 0.1% boiloff/day for hydrolox propellant. The study clearly identified the need to decrease the design boiloff rate by an order or magnitude or more.
Approaches to the design of low Earth orbit (LEO) propellant depots were also discussed in the 2009 Augustine report to NASA, which "examined the [then] current concepts for in-space refueling." The report determined there are essentially two approaches to refueling a spacecraft in LEO:
Propellant tanker delivery. In this approach, a single tanker performs a rendezvous and docking with an on-orbit spacecraft. The tanker then transfers propellant, then departs. This approach is "much like an airborne tanker refuels an aircraft."
In-space depot. An alternative approach is for many tankers to rendezvous and transfer propellant to an orbital depot. Then, at a later time, a spacecraft may dock with the depot and receive a propellant load before departing Earth orbit.
Both approaches were considered feasible with 2009 spaceflight technology, but anticipated that significant further engineering development and in-space demonstration would be required before missions could depend on the technology. Both approaches were seen to offer the potential of long-term life-cycle savings.
Beyond theoretical studies, since at least 2016, SpaceX has undertaken funded development of an interplanetary set of technologies called the Interplanetary Transport System (ITS). While the system consists of a combination of several elements that are considered by SpaceX to be key to making long-duration beyond Earth orbit (BEO) spaceflights possible by reducing the cost per ton delivered to Mars by multiple orders of magnitude over what NASA approaches have achieved, refilling of propellants in orbit is one of the four key elements. In a novel mission architecture, the SpaceX design intends to enable the long-journey spacecraft to expend most all of its propellant load during the launch to low Earth orbit while it serves as the second stage of the launch vehicle, and then—after refilling on orbit by an ITS tanker—provide the significant amount of energy necessary to put the spacecraft onto an interplanetary trajectory. The ITS tanker is designed to transport approximately 380 tonnes (840,000 lb) of propellant to low Earth orbit.
A second propellant tanker concept is underway. United Launch Alliance (ULA) has a proposed Advanced Cryogenic Evolved Stage (ACES) tanker—a concept that dates back to work by Boeing in 2006, sized to transport up to 73 tonnes (161,000 lb) of propellant—in early design with first flight planned for no earlier than 2023, with initial usage as a propellant tanker potentially beginning in the mid-2020s.