The use of the second order perturbation correction, Eq. (4), for the calculation of the Kv value in the case of PJTE instability is incorrect because in this case |Kv|>K0, meaning the first perturbation correction is larger than the main term, and hence the criterion of applicability of the perturbation theory in its simplest form does not hold. In this case, we should consider the contribution of the lowest excited states (that make the total curvature negative) in a pseudodegenerate problem of perturbation theory. For the simplest case when only one excited state creates the main instability of the ground state, we can treat the problem via a pseudodegenerate two-level problem, including the contribution of the higher, weaker-influencing states as a second order correction. In the PJTE two-level problem we have two electronic states of the high-symmetry configuration, ground β and excited γ, separated by an energy interval of 2Δ, that become mixed under nuclear displacements of certain symmetry Q=Qα; the denotations α, β, and γ indicate, respectively, the irreducible representations to which the symmetry coordinate and the two states belong. In essence, this is the original formulation of the PJTE. Assuming that the excited state is sufficiently close to the ground one, the vibronic coupling between them should be treated as a perturbation problem for two near-degenerate states. With both interacting states non-degenerate the vibronic coupling constant F in Eq.(5) (omitting indices)is non-zero for only one coordinate Q=Qα with α=β×γ. This gives us directly the symmetry of the direction of softening and possible distortion of the ground state. Assuming that the primary force constants K0 in the two states are the same (for different K0 see [1]), we get a 2×2 secular equation with the following solution for the energies ε± of the two states interacting under the linear vibronic coupling (the energy is read off the middle of the 2Δ interval between the initial levels):
ε±= (1/2)Q2±[Δ2+F2Q2](1/2) (7)
It is seen from this expressions that, on taking into account the vibronic coupling, F≠0, the two APES curves change in different ways: in the upper sheet the curvature (the coefficient at Q2 in the expansion on Q) increases, whereas in the lower one it decreases. But until (F2/K0)<Δ the minima of both states correspond to the point Q = 0, as in the absence of vibronic mixing. However, if
(F2/K0)>Δ (8)
the curvature of the lower curve of the APES becomes negative, and the system is unstable with respect to the Q displacements (Fig. 1). The minima points on the APES in this case are given by
±Q0=[F2/K02-Δ2/F2]1/2 (9)
From these expressions and Fig. 1 it is seen that while the ground state is softened (destabilized) by the PJTE, the excited state is hardened (stabilized), and this effect is the larger, the smaller Δ and the larger F. It takes place in any polyatomic system and influences many molecular properties, including the existence of stable excited states of molecular systems that are unstable in the ground state (e.g., excited states of intermediates of chemical reactions); in general, even in the absence of instability the PJTE softens the ground state and increases the vibrational frequencies in the excited state.