Quantum Break was officially announced on 21 May 2013. Gameplay trailers were released at major conventions, including Electronic Entertainment Expo 2013, and VGX Awards 2013. Remedy released the first gameplay demo at Microsoft's conference at Gamescom 2014, with Lake saying that the demo would make viewers "speechless". The game was originally set for release in 2015, but Microsoft held it to 2016 to avoid competition with other Xbox One exclusives including Halo 5: Guardians, Rise of the Tomb Raider, and Forza Motorsport 6, incidentally giving Remedy more time to refine the game. At Gamescom 2016, Microsoft announced that the title would be released on 6 April 2016. The show was released separately and was not available in the game's retail edition in an effort to save disc space. As a result, both Xbox One and Windows 10 users need to stream the show. Microsoft initially considered other options, including releasing it as a standalone show or a separate Xbox Live download.
Though Quantum Break was originally announced as a Xbox One exclusive, Microsoft announced in February 2016 that the game would be released for Windows 10 (Universal Windows Platform) as well, to launch simultaneously with the Xbox One version. Developed internally by Remedy, the PC version would only be released on Windows Store and would require DirectX 12. This created backslash among players, who criticized Microsoft for misleading them into buying a Xbox One by not revealing the PC version's existence when the game was announced. Microsoft's Phil Spencer replied by saying that delivering a game to a broader audience "a good thing" and that it could increase the game's sales. Lake added that he was "confused" and "baffled" by the responses of the community.
Players who purchase the Xbox One version of the game would receive a digital code for the Windows 10 version. Alan Wake, along with its two downloadable special episodes "The Signal" and "The Writer", as well as American Nightmare, would be available for free for players who purchased the game through backward compatibility. Players who had not reached 18 years old by the game's release would get Kameo: Elements of Power as their pre-order bonus instead. In January 2016, Puha revealed that the game was very close to completion, and that the team was "tired". On 21 February 2016, Remedy confirmed that the game had been declared gold, indicating it was being prepared for duplication and release. Microsoft celebrated the launch with launch parties in various Microsoft stores in the US and Canada, and in Sydney. Released alongside the game was a novel titled Quantum Break: Zero State.
A standalone PC version, released through Steam, and the physical Timeless Collector's Edition (which includes a development documentary, a book detailing the game's development, a soundtrack CD, and posters) was released on 29 September 2016. Unlike the Windows 10/UWP version, it supports Windows 7 and newer on 64-bit platforms. Nordic Games, who had assisted the PC distribution of Alan Wake, Ori and the Blind Forest: Definitive Edition, and State of Decay: Year-One Survival Edition, distributed the retail copies.