To fix their position using radio acoustic ranging, a ship′s crew first ascertained the temperature and salinity of sea water in the vicinity of the ship to determine an accurate velocity of sound through the water. The crew then threw a small TNT bomb off the ship′s stern. It exploded at a depth of about 100 feet (30 meters), and a chronograph aboard the ship automatically recorded the time the explosion was heard at the ship. The sound traveled outward from the explosion, eventually reaching hydrophones at known locations – shore stations, anchored manned station ships, or unmanned moored buoys – at a distance from the ship. Each hydrophone was connected to a radio transmitter that automatically sent a signal indicating the time its hydrophone detected the sound. At the distances involved – generally less than 200 nautical miles (370 km) – each of these radio signals arrived at the ship at essentially the same instant that each of the remote hydrophones detected the sound of the explosion. The ship′s chronograph automatically recorded the time each radio signal arrived at the ship. By subtracting the time of the explosion from the time of radio signal reception, the ship′s crew could determine the length of time the sound wave required to travel from the point of the explosion to each remote hydrophone and, knowing the speed of sound in the surrounding sea water, could multiply the sound′s travel time by the velocity of sound in sea water to determine the distance between the explosion and the hydrophone. By determining the distance to at least two remote hydrophones in known locations, the ship′s crew could use triangulation to fix the ship′s position.
In deep waters, such as those that prevailed in the Pacific Ocean along the United States West Coast, the Coast and Geodetic Survey could rely upon shore stations to support radio acoustic ranging because the deep water allowed sound to travel to the coast. Along the United States East Coast, where shallower waters prevailed, sound had greater difficulty in reaching the coast, and the Coast and Geodetic Survey relied more heavily on anchored manned station ships, and later unmanned moored buoys, to support radio acoustic ranging.
Chronographs recorded times to the hundredth of a second, and the crew of a ship using radio acoustic ranging could determine their ship′s distance from the remote hydrophone stations to within 50 feet (15 meters), allowing them to plot their ship′s position with great accuracy for the time. With sound waves traveling from the point of the explosion to the distant hydrophones at about 0.8 nautical mile (1.5 km) per second, ships occasionally used radio acoustic ranging at distances of over 200 nautical miles (370 km) between ship and hydrophone station, and distances of 75 to 100 nautical miles (139 to 185 km) were common.