Early radar systems, like the UK's Chain Home, consisted of large transmitters and separate receivers. The transmitter periodically sends out a short pulse of a powerful radio signal, which is sent into space through broadcast antennas. When the signal reflects off a target, some of that signal is reflected back in the direction of the station, where it is received. The received signal is a tiny fraction of the broadcast power, and has to be powerfully amplified in order to be used.
The same signals are also sent over local electrical wiring to the operator's station, which is equipped with an oscilloscope. Electronics attached to the oscilloscope provides a signal that increases in voltage over a short period of time, a few microseconds. When sent to the X input of the oscilloscope, this causes a horizontal line to be displayed on the scope. This "sweep" is triggered by a signal tapped off the broadcaster, so the sweep begins when the pulse is sent. Amplified signals from the receiver are then sent to the Y input, where any received reflection causes the beam to move upward on the display. This causes a series of "blips" to appear along the horizontal axis, indicating reflected signals. By measuring the distance from the start of the sweep to the blip, which corresponds to the time between broadcast and reception, the distance to the object can be determined.
Soon after the introduction of radar, the radio transponder appeared. Transponders are a combination of receiver and transmitter whose operation is automated – upon reception of a particular signal, normally a pulse on a particular frequency, the transponder sends out a pulse in response, typically delayed by some very short time. Transponders were initially used as the basis for early IFF systems; aircraft with the proper transponder would appear on the display as part of the normal radar operation, but then the signal from the transponder would cause a second blip to appear a short time later. Single blips were enemies, double blips friendly.
Transponder-based distance-distance navigation systems have a significant advantage in terms of positional accuracy. Any radio signal spreads out over distance, forming the fan-like beams of the Lorenz signal, for instance. As the distance between the broadcaster and receiver grows, the area covered by the fan increases, decreasing the accuracy of location within it. In comparison, transponder-based systems measure the timing between two signals, and the accuracy of that measure is largely a function of the equipment and nothing else. This allows these systems to remain accurate over very long range.
The latest transponder systems (mode S) can also provide position information, possibly derived from GNSS, allowing for even more precise positioning of targets.