Switches are crucial to the safe running of a railway because they pose a number of risks:
Incorrectly set points may result in two trains being on the same track, potentially causing a collision. The wrong setting might be caused by tampering with a manually operable switch or by operation errors in an interlocking.
Reversing the points under a moving train will almost always derail the train.
Points might move due to the extreme forces exerted by a passing train.
A train might stand so close to the frog of a switch that a passing train might collide with its side (the first train is then said to foul the switch).
The necessary maintenance of the complex mechanical device might be neglected.
To avoid accidents caused by these risks, suitable technical remedies as well as certain practices are applied. The most important are:
Locks to prevent reversing a switch without a proper key
Interlockings that allow signals only to be cleared when switches are set correctly.
Track circuits to prevent reversing when a passing train is detected.
Clamps that lock blades to the stock rails in a secure manner.
Track circuits and fouling markers to point out fouling vehicles.
Maintenance schedules, especially for measuring deviations of critical distances.
The following paragraphs give examples of accidents that were caused by one or more of the risks mentioned above.
Similar (non-fatal) wrecks near Newport News, Virginia, on August 12, 1992, and in Stewiacke, Nova Scotia, on April 12, 2001, resulted from switches being thrown open in front of the trains by saboteurs. To prevent these incidents, most unused switches are locked up.
The 1998 Eschede train disaster in Germany was one of the world's deadliest high-speed train accidents, resulting in over 100 deaths. It occurred when a wheel rim failed at 200 km/h (125 mph), partially derailing the car. The wheel rim went through the floor of the carriage and was dragging on the ground. On arrival at the junction it threw the switch, causing the rear wheels of the car to switch onto a track parallel to the track taken by the front wheels. The car was thereby thrown into and destroyed the piers supporting a 300-tonne roadway overpass.
In 1980, 18 people died in the Buttevant Rail Disaster at Buttevant, County Cork, in Ireland, when the Dublin–Cork express was derailed at high speed after being inadvertently switched into a siding via ground frame operated points.
The May 2002 Potters Bar rail crash at Potters Bar, Hertfordshire, in the United Kingdom, occurred when a switch sprang to a different position as a coach crossed it, a type of mishap called splitting the switch. The front wheels of a coach progressed along the straight track as intended, but the rear wheels slewed along the diverging track. This caused the whole coach to detach from the train and slew sideways across the platform ahead. The movement of the switch occurred beneath the final coach, so that although seven people were killed, the front coaches remained on the tracks. Poor maintenance of the points was found to be the primary cause of the crash.
The initial conclusion of the inquiry into the Grayrigg derailment of February 23, 2007, blames an incorrectly maintained set of points.