In British practice, only passenger trains were fitted with continuous brakes until about 1930; goods and mineral trains ran at slower speed and relied on the brake force from the locomotive and tender and the brake van—a heavy vehicle provided at the rear of the train and occupied by a guard.
Goods and mineral vehicles were provided with hand brakes by which the brakes could be applied by a hand lever operated by staff on the ground. These hand brakes were used where necessary when vehicles were parked but also when these trains needed to descend a steep gradient; the train then stopped before descending and the guard walked forward to pin down the handles of sufficient brakes to give adequate braking effort. Early goods vehicles had brake handles on one side only and random alignment of the vehicles gave the guard sufficient braking but, from about 1930, so-called "either-side" brake handles were provided. These trains, not fitted with continuous brakes were described as "unfitted" trains and they survived in British practice until about 1985. However, from about 1930, semi-fitted trains were introduced, in which some goods vehicles were fitted with continuous brakes and a proportion of such vehicles marshalled next to the locomotive gave sufficient brake power to run at somewhat higher speeds than unfitted trains. A trial in January 1952 saw a 52-wagon, 850 ton, coal train run 127 miles (204 km) at an average of 38 miles per hour (61 km/h), compared to the usual coal train speed on the Midland main line of 15 miles per hour (24 km/h), or 20 miles per hour (32 km/h) to 25 miles per hour (40 km/h) of "fitted" freights. By 1952 only 14% of open wagons, 55% of covered and 80% of cattle trucks had vacuum brakes.
In the early days of diesel locomotives, a purpose-built brake tender was attached to the locomotive to increase braking effort when hauling unfitted trains. The brake tender was low, so that the driver could still see the line and signals ahead if the brake tender was propelled (pushed) ahead of the locomotive, which was often the case.
By 1878 there were over 105 patents in various countries for braking systems, most of which were obviously stillborn.