Relative atomic mass (symbol: Ar), or atomic weight, is a dimensionless (number only) physical quantity. In its modern definition, it is the ratio of the average mass of atoms of an element (in a given sample) to one unified atomic mass unit.
The unified atomic mass unit, symbol u, is defined being ​1⁄12 of the mass of a carbon-12 atom. Since both values in the ratio are expressed in the same unit (u), the resulting value is dimensionless; hence the value is relative.
For one sample, its relative atomic mass (atomic weight) is a straight average over the individual atom weights (isotopes) present. Between sources, the atomic weight can vary when the source's origin (its radioactive history or diffusion history) caused a different mixture of isotopic concentrations. For example, due to a different mix of stable carbon-12 and carbon-13, a sample of elemental carbon from volcanic methane will have a different relative atomic mass than one collected from plant or animal tissues.
The well-known standard atomic weight is an application of this relative atomic mass values from different samples. It is expected range of the relative atomic mass values, with the various sources being terrestrial (taken from Earth). These standard atomic weights are what chemists loosely and so incorrectly call "atomic weights" (incorrectly, because they are not from a single sample). They are the most published form of the relative atomic mass, because they are not sample-specific, but cover a broad range of expected Earth samples.
The continued use of the term "atomic weight" (of any element), as opposed to "relative atomic mass" has attracted considerable controversy, since at least the 1960s, mainly due to the technical difference between weight and mass in physics. Both terms are officially sanctioned by IUPAC. The term "relative atomic mass" now seems to be gaining as the preferred term over "atomic weight", although in the case of "standard atomic weight", this shorter term (as opposed to the more correct "standard relative atomic mass") continues to be used.