Consider a certain observable A of a physical system undergoing an RG transformation. The magnitude of the observable as the length scale of the system goes from small to large may be: (a) always increasing, (b) always decreasing or (c) other. In the first case, the observable is said to be a relevant observable; in the second, irrelevant and in the third, marginal.
A relevant observable is needed to describe the macroscopic behaviour of the system; an irrelevant observable is not. Marginal observables may or may not need be taken into account. A remarkable broad fact is that most observables are irrelevant, i.e., the macroscopic physics is dominated by only a few observables in most systems. As an example, in microscopic physics, to describe a system consisting of a mole of carbon-12 atoms we need of the order of 1023 (Avogadro's number) variables, while to describe it as a macroscopic system (12 grams of carbon-12) we only need a few.
Before Wilson's RG approach, there was an astonishing empirical fact to explain: the coincidence of the critical exponents (i.e., the exponents of the reduced-temperature dependence of several quantities near a second order phase transition) in very disparate phenomena, such as magnetic systems, superfluid transition (Lambda transition), alloy physics, etc. Thus, in general, thermodynamic features of a system near a phase transition depend only on a small number of variables, such as dimensionality and symmetry, but are insensitive to details of the underlying microscopic properties of the system.
This coincidence of critical exponents for ostensibly quite different physical systems is called universality−−and is now successfully explained by the RG: essentially by showing that the differences among all such phenomena are, in fact, traceable to such irrelevant observables, while the relevant observables are shared in common.
Thus, many macroscopic phenomena may be grouped into a small set of universality classes, specified by the shared sets of relevant observables.