A model resonance ionization mass spectrometry (RIMS) set-up consists of a laser system (consisting of multiple lasers), sample from which the atoms are derived, and a suitable mass spectrometer which mass-selectively detects the photo ions created from resonance. In resonant ionization, atoms or molecules from ground state are excited to higher energy states by the resonant absorption of photons to produce ions. These ions are then monitored by appropriate detectors. In order to ensure a highly-efficient sensitivity and process saturation, the atomic or molecular beam must be formed from the ground state, the atoms should be efficiently excited and ionized, each atom should be converted by the photon field of a short-timed pulsed laser into a positive ion and a valence electron, and subsequent quantitative detection of the produced ions is ensured using relevant ion detectors.
In a basic RIS process, a pulsed laser beam produces photons of the right energy in order to excite an atom initially in its ground state, a, to an excited level, b. During the laser pulse, the ion population of state b increases at the expense of that of state a. After a few minutes, the rate of stimulated emission from the excited state will equal rate of production so that the system is in equilibrum as long as the laser intensity is kept sufficiently high during a pulse. This high laser intensity translates into a photon fluence (photons per unit of beam area) large enough so that a necessary condition for the saturation of the RIS process has been met. If, in addition, the rate of photoionization is greater than the rate of consumption of intermediates, then each selected state is converted to one electron plus one positive ion, so that the RIS process is saturated.  A usually efficient way to produce free atoms of an element in the ground state is to atomize the elements by ion sputtering or thermal vaporization of the element from a laser matrix under vacuum conditions or at environments with pressures very low below the normal atmospheric pressure. The resulting plume of secondary atoms is then channeled through the path of multiple tuned laser beams which are capable of exciting consecutive electronic transitions in the specified element. This promotes the atoms above their ionization potentials while interfering atoms from other elements are hardly ionized since they are generally transparent to the laser beam. This produces photoions which are extracted and directed towards an analytical facility such as a magnetic sector to be counted. This approach is extremely sensitive to atoms of the specified element so that the ionization efficiency is almost 100% and also elementally selective, due to the highly unlikely chance that other species will be resonantly ionized.
To achieve high ionization efficiencies, monochromatic lasers with high instantaneous spectral power are used. Typical lasers being used include continuous-wave lasers with extremely high spectral purity and pulsed lasers for analyses involving limited atoms.  Continuous-wave lasers however are often preferred to pulsed lasers due to the latter’s relatively low duty cycle since they can only produce photo ions during the brief later pulses, and the difficulty in reproducing results due to pulse-to-pulse jitters, laser beam drifting, and wavelength variations.  Moderate laser powers, if high enough to affect the desired transition states, can be used since the non-resonant photoionization cross section is then low which implies a negligible ionization efficiency of unwanted atoms. The influence of the laser matrix to be used for the sample can also be reduced by separating evaporation and ionization processes both in time and in space.
Another factor that could affect the selectivity and sensitivity of the ionization process is the presence of contaminants caused by surface or impact ionization. This can be reduced up to appreciable orders of magnitude by using mass analysis so that isotopic compositions of the desired element can be determined. Most of the elements of the Periodic Table can be ionized by one of the several excitation schemes available.  The appropriate excitation scheme is chosen based on the level scheme of the element’s atom, its ionization energy, required selectivity and sensitivity, likely interferences, and the wavelengths and power levels of the available laser systems.  Excitation schemes vary, for the most part, in the last step, the ionization. This is due to the low cross section for non-resonant photo-ionization by the laser. A pulsed laser system allows for the efficient possibility to couple a time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer to the resonance ionization set-up. This is because TOF systems can produce an abundance sensitivity of up to 104 whereas magnetic mass spectrometers can only achieve up to 102.
The total selectivity in a RIS process comprises of the sensitivities in the various resonance transitions for multiple step wise excitations. The probability of an atom to come in contact the resonance of another atom is about 10-5. The addition of a mass spectrometer increases this figure by a factor of 106 such that the total elemental selectivity surpasses or at least compares to that of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), the most selective technique available.