Electromagnetic propulsion designs which operate on the principle of reaction mass have been around since the start of the 20th century. In the 1960s, extensive research was conducted on two designs which emit high velocity ionized gases in similar ways: ion thrusters that convert propellant to ions and accelerate and eject them via electric potentials, and plasma thrusters that convert propellant to plasma ions and accelerate and eject them via plasma currents. In the latter, plasma can be generated from an intense source of microwave or other radio-frequency (RF) energy, and in combination with a resonant cavity, can be tuned to resonate at a precise frequency.
A low-propellant space drive has long been a goal for space exploration, since the propellant is dead weight that must be lifted and accelerated with the ship all the way from launch until the moment it is used (see Tsiolkovsky rocket equation). Gravity assists, solar sails, and beam-powered propulsion from a spacecraft-remote location such as the ground or in orbit, are useful because they allow a ship to gain speed without propellant. However, some of these methods do not work in deep space. Shining a light out of the ship provides a small force from radiation pressure, i.e., using photons as a form of propellant, but the force is far too weak (for a given amount of input power) to be useful in practice.
A true zero-propellant drive is widely believed to be impossible, but if it existed, it could potentially be used for travel in many environments including deep space. Thus, such drives are a popular concept in science fiction, and their improbability contributes to enthusiasm for exploring such designs.
Conventional rocket engines expel propellant, such as when ships move masses of water, aircraft move masses of air, or rockets expel exhaust. A drive which does not expel propellant in order to produce a reaction force, providing thrust while being a closed system with no external interaction, would be a reactionless drive. Such a drive would violate the conservation of momentum and Newton's third law, leading many physicists to believe it to be impossible, labeling the idea pseudoscience. On the other hand, a drive that interacts with an external field would be part of an open system, propellantless but not reactionless, like a sail catching and redirecting existing winds to move a ship.
The first proposal for an RF resonant cavity thruster came from British engineer Roger Shawyer in 2001. He invented a design with a conical cavity, calling it the EmDrive. Guido Fetta later built the Cannae Drive based on Shawyer's concept  a resonant thruster with a pillbox-shaped cavity. Since 2008, a few physicists have tested their own models, trying to confirm results claimed by Shawyer and Fetta. Juan Yang at Xi'an's Northwestern Polytechnical University (NWPU) initially reported thrust from a model they built, but retracted her claims in 2016 after a measurement error was identified and an improved setup measured no significant thrust. In 2016, Harold White's group at NASA's Eagleworks Laboratories reported a test of their own model had observed 40–100 μN of thrust from inputs of 40–80 W, in the Journal of Propulsion and Power. In December 2016, Yue Chen, part of the communication satellite division of the China Academy of Space Technology (CAST), said his team had tested several prototypes using an "experimental verification platform", observed thrust, and was carrying out in-orbit verification. In September 2017, Chen talked about this CAST project again in an interview on CCTV.