In the current Code of Points (2017-2020), the final grade is derived from the sum of the ratings for composition and performance, each with a maximum value of 10 points, so the final score will be a maximum of 20 points. There are also penalties, which are realized by subtracting points from the final note for certain specified mistakes made by the gymnast.
"composition" consists of the sum of: difficulty body (jumps, balances and rotations), combination of combined rhythmic steps with specific key technical groups each apparatus and elements of other technical groups of the device, dynamic elements with rotation and launch (commonly known as risk) and mastery of the apparatus.
"execution" values in all elements; musically, body art and technique with the appliance. It can be distinguished between artistic faults and technical fouls. In the first, the unity of the composition, exercise music, body language and the variety in the use of space, among others are valued; on the other hand, the technical component and technical aspects of body movements, technique based system, equality of work left / right hand during exercise, etc. are valued. Errors regarding the perfect model of conduct accumulate and are assigned specific penalty values, which ultimately are subtracted from the starting value (about 10 represents a perfect execution equal to the model, without any error).
Regarding the basis for penalties, these include: Failure to keep the appliance in constant motion. Failure to end the exercise at the exact moment the accompanying music ends. A low degree of difficulty in the device or in the movements of the gymnast (some degree of difficulty must always exist). Non-rhythmic steps within the tapestry are penalized. Certain non-permissible uses of the hands are penalized. Going beyond the boundary of the designated performance area, whether by the gymnast or the apparatus, is penalized. Non-regulation attire is penalized. Communication with the coach or with partners during the execution of the exercise is penalized.