Storstad, which remained afloat, lowered her own lifeboats and began the rescue of the many survivors in the water. The radio operator at Father Point who picked up the emergency signal from Empress of Ireland notified two Canadian government steamers, Eureka at Father Point Wharf and Lady Evelyn at Rimouski Wharf. Eureka was first on the scene and by 03:00 had returned to Father Point Wharf with 32 survivors and several bodies. Eureka was told to go to Rimouski Wharf where Lady Evelyn arrived around 04:00 with more survivors and bodies. Around 06:10 the survivors and bodies Storstad had on board were transferred to Eureka and transported to Rimouski Wharf, Storstad was damaged but not enough to stop her then continuing to Quebec.
There were only 465 survivors: 4 of whom were children (the other 134 children were lost), 41 of whom were women (the other 269 women were lost) and 172 men (the other 437 men were lost). The fact that most passengers were asleep at the time of the sinking (most not even awakened by the collision) also contributed to the loss of life when they were drowned in their cabins, most of them from the starboard side where the collision happened.
One of the survivors was Captain Kendall, who was on the bridge at the time, and quickly ordered the lifeboats to be launched. When Empress of Ireland lurched onto her side, he was thrown from the bridge into the water, and was taken down with her as she began to go under. Swimming to the surface, he clung to a wooden grate long enough for crew members aboard a nearby lifeboat to row over and pull him in. Immediately, he took command of the small boat, and began rescue operations. The lifeboat's crew successfully pulled in many people from the water, and when the boat was full, Kendall ordered the crew to row to the lights of the mysterious vessel that had rammed them, so that the survivors could be dropped off. Kendall and the crew made a few more trips between the nearby Storstad and the wreckage to search for more survivors. After an hour or two, Kendall gave up, since any survivors who were still in the water would have either succumbed to hypothermia or drowned by then.
Amongst the dead were the English dramatist and novelist Laurence Irving, the explorer Henry Seton Karr, William Hart-Bennett's wife Ella, and Suva's mayor Gabriel J. Marks.
The passengers included 167 members of the Salvation Army. These travelers, all but eight of whom died, were members of the Canadian Staff Band of The Salvation Army who were traveling to London for an international conference. One of the four children who survived was 7-year-old Grace Hanagan who was born in Oshawa, Ontario on 16 May 1907, and was traveling with her parents who were among the Salvation Army members who did not survive. Grace Hanagan Martyn was also the last survivor of the sinking and died in St. Catharines, Ontario on 15 May 1995 at the age of 87, one day before her 88th birthday.
As for Storstad's Chief Officer Alfred Toftenes, little is known of what became of him except that he died in New York a few years later, in 1918. He is buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn.
Robert Crellin saved over twenty people and became famous for his heroics during the disaster.