Rocket sled launch helps a vehicle gain altitude, and proposals commonly involve the track curving up a mountain. Advantages to any launch system that starts from high altitudes include reduce gravity drag (the cost of lifting fuel in a gravity well). The thinner air will reduce air resistance and allow more efficient engine geometries. Rocket nozzles have different shapes (expansion ratios) to maximize thrust at different air pressures. (Though NASA's aerospike engine for the Lockheed Martin X-33 was designed to change geometry to remain efficient at a variety of different pressures, the aerospike engine had added weight and complexity; X-33 funding was canceled in 2001; and other benefits from launch assist would remain even if aerospike engines reached flight testing).
For example, the air is 39% thinner at 2500 meters. The more efficient rocket plume geometry and the reduced air friction allows the engine to be 5% more efficient per amount of fuel burned.
Another advantage to high altitude launches is that it eliminates the need to throttle back the engine when the "Max Q" limit is attained. Rockets launched in thick atmosphere can go so fast that air resistance may cause structural damage. Engines are throttled back when Max Q is reached, until the rocket is high enough that they can resume full power. The Atlas V 551 gives an example of this. It reaches its Max Q at 30,000 feet. Its engine is throttled back to 60% thrust for 30 seconds. This reduced acceleration adds to the gravity drag the rocket must overcome. Additionally, space craft engines concerned with Max Q are more complex as they must be throttled during launch.
A launch from high altitude need not throttle back at Max Q as it starts above the thickest portion of the Earth's atmosphere.
Debora A. Grant and James L. Rand in: "The Balloon Assisted Launch System - A Heavy Lift Balloon" wrote: "It was established some time ago that a ground launched rocket capable of reaching 20 km would be able to reach an altitude of almost 100km if it was launched from 20km." They suggest that small rockets are lifted above the majority of the atmosphere by balloon in order to avoid the problems discussed above.