Avian skin is a bit more complicated than the skin of gliding lizards or bats because the presence of feathers. In addition to the counteracting stresses and stains associated with flight, avian skin must provide a means to monitor and anchor a "coat of feathers", thus the structure of avian skin is different from skin of other flying and gliding animals. To better understand the structure of avian skin, avian skin has been broken down into three different functional components:
hydraulic skeleto-muscular apparatus of the feathers
This functional component consists of the only of the structural features of the feather tracts, namely the cutis, and connective tissue layer fascia superficialis. This functional component was named "hydraulic skeletal" due to the fact that the fat bodies embedded within cutis and fascia act similar to the hydrostatic bodies within a hydrostatic skeleton. However the functional role of the fat bodies within the hydraulic skeleto-muscular apparatus of the feathers is to counteract forces generated by the erector and depressor muscle of the feathers tracts. rather than to facilitate movement within of a body.
dermo-subcutaneous muscular system of integument
This functional component of avian skin consists of the smooth muscle of the apertia and striated subcutaneous muscles. The smooth muscles of the apertia counteract the horizontal forces experienced by the feather follicles. The striated subcutaneous muscles also adjust the position of the feather follicles in the directions the smooth muscle cannot. Together this system acts as an integrated muscular system that properly positions the feather tracts on the body of the bird.
subcutaneous hydraulic skeletal system
This functional component of avian skin consists of the fat bodies of the fascia superficialis and Fascia subcutanea. The majority of the fat bodies are located either between fascia superficialis and the Fascia subcutanea. These fat bodies are stratically located at depression within the body of the bird and function to even out depressions so that feather tracts of the skeleto-muscular apparatus function properly.