The recirculating type of planetary roller screw is also known as a recycling roller screw. A recirculating roller screw can provide a very high degree of positional accuracy by using minimal thread leads. The rollers of a recirculating roller screw move axially within the nut until being reset after one orbit about the screw. Recirculating roller screws do not employ ring gears. Carl Bruno Strandgren was awarded a US Patent for the recirculating roller screw in 1965.
The screw and nut may have very fine identical single- or two-start threads. Recirculating rollers are grooved (instead of threaded) so they move axially during spinning engagement with the threads of the nut and screw, shifting up or down by one lead of thread after completing an orbit around the screw. The nut assembly typically includes a slotted cage and cam rings. The cage captivates the rollers in elongated slots, equally spacing the rollers while permitting rotation and axial motion of the rollers. The cam rings have opposing cams aligned with an axial groove in the wall of the nut. After a roller completes an orbit about the nut it is released into the groove, disengages from nut and screw, and is pushed between the cams to the axial midpoint of the nut assembly (shifting by a distance equal to the lead of the screw). Returned to its starting position, and reengaged to nut and screw, the roller may then orbit the screw once again.
In 2006, Charles C. Cornelius and Shawn P. Lawlor received a patent for a cage-less recirculating roller screw system. As with the traditional recirculating roller screw system, rollers disengage from the screw when they come upon an axial groove in the wall of the nut. The system differs in that the rollers are continually engaged by the nut, and the axial groove of the nut is threaded. Non-helical threads in the axial groove of the nut return the roller to its axial starting position (after completion of an orbit). Non-circular compression rings, or cam rings, at opposite ends of the rollers (roller axles) apply constant pressure between rollers and nut, synchronizing roller rotation and thrusting the rollers into the nut's axial groove. Lacking ring gears and roller cage, cage-less recirculating roller screws can be relatively efficient and, as a result, permit higher dynamic capacities for some screw shaft diameters.