Many space stations and ships use a rotating design.
1968: Arthur C. Clarke's novel 2001: A Space Odyssey was developed concurrently with Stanley Kubrick's film version of 2001. In it, the rotating space station Space Station V provides artificial gravity and features prominently on the book's first-edition cover.
1984: The Peter Hyams directed film 2010 features a battleship-size, Russian built spacecraft (designed by futurist artist Syd Mead), the Leonov, which has a continuously rotating central section, providing an artificial gravity for the occupants.
1985: The novel Ender's Game features a multi-ringed station, called "Battle School," with varying levels of simulated gravity. As the characters ascend through the station towards the center, there is a noticeable decline in the feeling of gravity.
1994: The humans in the science fiction series Babylon 5 use rotating sections to provide artificial gravity. Earth Alliance space stations such as the Babylon series (hence the name of the series), transfer stations such as the one at Io near the main Sol system jump gate, and EarthForce Omega-Class Destroyers made extensive use of rotating sections to lengthen deployment times and increase mission flexibility as the effects of zero gravity are no longer a concern.
1999: The Japanese manga and anime Planetes has its main story set in "The Seven," the 7th wheel orbital station, and a 9th is under construction by 2075. In the Zenon trilogy (Zenon: Girl of the 21st Century, Zenon: The Zequel and Zenon: Z3), 13-year-old Zenon lives on a rotating space station owned by the fictional WyndComm from 2049 though 2054, but it is not designed in a way that would allow for artificial gravity through centripetal force.
2003: In the re-imagined series Battlestar Galactica. Ragnar Anchorage is a three ringed weapons storage station, and the civilian ship Zephyr is a luxury liner featuring a ringed midsection.
2011: Most space stations in the Expanse series make use of artificial gravity by rotation, most notably Tycho Station. Even larger celestial objects like Ceres and Eros have been hollowed out and spun up to generate gravitational pull for their inhabitants.
2013: The Neil Blomkamp film Elysium has an enormous space station called Elysium (an open-roofed Bishop Ring.) It supports a city and habitat for the privileged upper classes of Earth.
2014: A vessel very similar in design to the NASA-designed Nautilus-X was used in Interstellar. The ship, known as the Endurance, was used as a staging station also capable of interplanetary flight.
2014: Space stations in the video game Elite: Dangerous (and its prequels) rotate to create artificial gravity.
2015: Thunderbird 5 in the ITV TV show Thunderbirds Are Go features a rotating gravity ring section on the space station which features a glass floor to observe the Earth below. The series is set in the year 2060. The NASA designed Hermes in the film The Martian was capable of space travel to Mars.