The physical process that gives rise to the elastic force in the moderate chain extension regime is the gradual straightening of the chain. At full chain extension, (i.e., the onset of regime II), the applied tension forces all of the isoprene units along the chain backbone to lie along piece-wise straight lines. Numerous experiments  strongly suggest that the molecular mechanism responsible for the elastic force must be associated with a change in chain entropy. How does a chain become straight? From MD simulations of free natural rubber molecules at temperatures near 300 K, we can study the conformations of the chain backbone. We find that departures of the chain backbone from linearity occur over contour lengths of just a few isoprene units (a kink).

Although an isoprene unit (Fig. 2) is free to rotate about each of its single C-C bonds, there are typically 3 favored rotational conformations, separated by ~120 degrees, that correspond to energy minima. An isoprene unit has three single C-C bonds and 18 allowed rotational conformations, each one with a unique end-to-end distance and energy. States with shorter end-to-end distances tend to have a higher energy. We designate these as ‘compact’ states and those having greater end-to-end distances as ‘extended’. As a network chain is gradually extended toward linear (but still confined by a surrounding tube), kinks must be straightened. Six of the 18 isoprene rotational conformations are extended states and, as the chain is straightened, more and more of the isoprene units are forced to spend more time these states. It is the decrease in entropy associated with reducing the number of rotational states allowed for each isoprene unit that gives rise to the elastic force in this regime. A force constant for chain extension can be estimated from the change in free energy associated with the entropy change that occurs as the occupancy of some rotational states is decreased. As with regime Ia, the force model for this regime is linear and proportional to the temperature divided by the chain tortuosity (the ratio of the chain contour length divided by its end-to-end distance). As the chain is extended, the tortuosity decreases from its initial value to 1.