The theory of scale relativity follows a similar construction as the one of the relativity of movement, which took place in three steps: galilean, special and general relativity.
This is not surprising, as in both cases the goal is to find laws satisfying transformation laws including one parameter that is relative: the speed in the case of the relativity of movement; the resolution in the case of the relativity of scales.
Galilean scale relativity involves linear transformations a constant fractal dimension, self-similarity and scale invariance. This situation is best illustrated with self-similar fractals. Here, the length of geodesics varies constantly with resolution. The fractal dimensions of free particles doesn't change with zooms. These are self-similar curves.
In Galilean relativity, recall that the laws of motion are the same in all inertial frames. Galileo famously concluded that "the movement is like nothing". In the case of self-similar fractals, paraphrasing Galileo, one could say that "scaling is like nothing". Indeed, the same patterns occur at different scales, so scaling is not noticeable, it is like nothing.
In the relativity of movement, Galileo's theory is an additive Galilean group:
X' = X - VT
T' = T
However, if we consider scale transformations (dilations and contractions), the laws are products, and not sums. This can be seen by the necessity to use units of measurements. Indeed, when we say that an object measures 10 meters, we actually mean the object measures 10 times the definite predetermined length called "meter". The number 10 is actually a scale ratio of two lengths 10/1m, where 10 is the measured quantity, and 1m is the arbitrary defining unit. This is the reason why the group is multiplicative.
Moreover, an arbitrary scale e doesn't have any physical meaning in itself (like the number 10), only scale ratios r = e' / e have a meaning, in our example, r = 10 / 1. Using the Gell-Mann-Lévy method, we can use a more relevant scale variable, V = ln(e' / e), and then find back an additive group for scale transformations by taking the logarithm – which converts products into sums.
Interestingly, when, in addition to the principle of scale relativity, one adds the principle of relativity of movement, there is a transition of the structure of geodesics at large scales, where trajectories do not depend on the resolution anymore, where trajectories become classical. This explains the shift of behavior from quantum to classical. See also Fig. 1.