Kaluza–Klein theory involves the use of a scalar gravitational field in addition to the electromagnetic field potential




A

μ




{\displaystyle A^{\mu }}
in an attempt to create a five-dimensional unification of gravity and electromagnetism. Its generalization with a 5th variable component of the metric that leads to a variable gravitational constant was first given by Pascual Jordan.
Brans–Dicke theory is a scalar-tensor theory, not a scalar theory, meaning that it represents the gravitational interaction using both a scalar field and a tensor field. We mention it here because one of the field equations of this theory involves only the scalar field and the trace of the stress–energy tensor, as in Nordström's theory. Moreover, the Brans–Dicke theory is equal to the independently derived theory of Jordan (hence it is often referred to as the Jordan-Brans–Dicke or JBD theory). The Brans–Dicke theory couples a scalar field with the curvature of space-time and is self-consistent and, assuming appropriate values for a tunable constant, this theory has not been ruled out by observation. The Brans–Dicke theory is generally regarded as a leading competitor of general relativity, which is a pure tensor theory. However, the Brans–Dicke theory seems to need too high a parameter, which favours general relativity).
Zee combined the idea of the BD theory with the Higgs-Mechanism of Symmetry Breakdown for mass generation, which led to a scalar-tensor theory with Higgs field as scalar field, in which the scalar field is massive (short-ranged). An example of this theory was proposed by H. Dehnen and H. Frommert 1991, parting from the nature of Higgs field interacting gravitational- and Yukawa (long-ranged)-like with the particles that get mass through it.
The Watt–Misner theory (1999) is a recent example of a scalar theory of gravitation. It is not intended as a viable theory of gravitation (since, as Watt and Misner point out, it is not consistent with observation), but as a toy theory which can be useful in testing numerical relativity schemes. It also has pedagogical value.