In Galilean scale relativity, spacetime was fractal with constant fractal dimensions. In special scale relativity, fractal dimensions can vary. This varying fractal dimension remains however constrained by a log-Lorentz law. This means that the laws satisfy a logarithmic version of the Lorentz transformation. The varying fractal dimension is covariant, in a similar way as proper time is covariant in special relativity.
In general scale relativity, the fractal dimension is not constrained anymore, and can take any value. In other words, it is the situation where there is curvature in scale space. Einstein's curved space-time becomes a particular case of the more general fractal spacetime.
General scale relativity is much more complicated, technical, and less developed than its Galilean and special versions. It involves non-linear laws, scale dynamics and gauge fields. In the case of non self-similarity, changing scales generates a new scale-force or scale-field which needs to be taken into account in a scale dynamics approach. Quantum mechanics then needs to be analyzed in scale space.
Finally, in general scale relativity, we need to take into account both movement and scale transformations, where scale variables depend on space-time coordinates. More details about the implications for abelian gauge fields and non-abelian gauge fields can be found in the literature. Nottale's 2011 book provides the state of the art.
To sum up, one can see some structural similarities between the relativity of movement and the relativity of scales in Table 1:
Table 1. Comparison between relativity of movement and relativity of scales. In both cases, there are two kinds of variables linked to the coordinate systems: variables which define the coordinate system, and variables that characterize the state of the coordinate system. In this analogy, the resolution can be assimilated to a speed; acceleration to a scale acceleration; space to the length of a fractal; and time, to the variable fractal dimension. Table adapted from this paper.