Other magnitude scales are based on aspects of seismic waves that only indirectly and incompletely reflect the force of an earthquake, involve other factors, and are generally limited in some respect of magnitude, focal depth, or distance. The moment magnitude scale – Mw or Mw – developed by Kanamori (1977) and Hanks & Kanamori (1979), is based on an earthquake's seismic moment, M0, a measure of how much "work" an earthquake does in sliding one patch of rock past other rock. Seismic moment is measured in Newton-meters (N • m or Nm) in the SI system of measurement, or dyne-centimeters (dyn-cm) in the older CGS system. In the simplest case the moment can be calculated knowing only the amount of slip, the area of the surface ruptured or slipped, and a factor for the resistance or friction encountered. These factors can be estimated for an existing fault to determine the magnitude of past earthquakes, or what might be anticipated for the future.
An earthquake's seismic moment can be estimated in various ways, which are the bases of the Mwb, Mwr, Mwc, Mww, Mwp, Mi, and Mwpd scales, all subtypes of the generic Mw scale. See Moment magnitude scale#Subtypes for details.
Seismic moment is considered the most objective measure of an earthquake's "size" in regard of total energy. However, it is based on a simple model of rupture, and on certain simplifying assumptions; it incorrectly assumes that the proportion of energy radiated as seismic waves is the same for all earthquakes.
Much of an earthquake's total energy as measured by Mw is dissipated as friction (resulting in heating of the crust). An earthquake's potential to cause strong ground shaking depends on the comparatively small fraction of energy radiated as seismic waves, and is better measured on the energy magnitude scale, Me. The proportion of total energy radiated as seismic varies greatly depending on focal mechanism and tectonic environment; Me and Mw for very similar earthquakes can differ by as much as 1.4 units.
Despite the usefulness of the Me scale, it is not generally used due to difficulties in estimating the radiated seismic energy.