Clamp-style shaft collars are designed to solve the problems associated with the set-screw collar. They come in one- and two-piece designs. Instead of protruding into the shaft, the screws act to compress the collar and lock it into place. The connection between the shaft and the collar is made with friction. The ease of use is maintained with this design and there is no shaft damage. Since the screws compress the collar, a uniform distribution of force is imposed on the shaft, leading to a holding power that is nearly twice that of set-screw collars.
Although clamp-type collars work very well under relatively constant loads, shock loads can cause the collar to shift its position on the shaft. This is due to the very high forces that can be created by a relatively small mass during impact, compared to a statically or gradually applied load. As an option for applications with this type of loading, an undercut can be made on the shaft and a clamp collar can be used to create a positive stop that is more resistant to shock loads.
Perhaps the most innovative and useful of the collars is the two-piece clamping collar. Two-piece clamp-style shaft collars can be disassembled or installed in position without having to remove other components from the shaft. The two-piece design provides greater clamping force than a single piece clamp because all of the force is transferred directly into clamping the shaft. Also, the two piece collar has double the amount of screws the one piece has. In single piece designs, the non-tightened side provides negative force, as it must hold the collar open to allow it to be placed onto the shaft. The single tightener must work against this force as well as provide clamping force of its own.
Two-screw clamps still provide force on two sides (one dimension) only. Four (or more) screw clamps provide force on four (or more) sides, and thus two dimensions.
Quick- Clamping collars are a variation of a one piece collar style. The principal of the connection is the same. The only difference is that instead of tightening a screw you can just use the lever to open and close the collar. This is a lot faster and does not require any tools.