In the role as a conditional operator, a shear pin will be used to prevent a mechanical device from operating before the criteria for operation are met. A shear pin gives a distinct threshold for the force required for operation. It is very cheap and easy to produce delivering a very high reliability and predictable tolerance. They are almost maintenance-free and can remain ready for operation for years with little to no decrease in reliability. Shear pins are only useful for a single operating cycle, after each operation they have to be replaced. A very simple example is the plastic or wire loop affixed to the handles of common fire extinguishers. Its presence prevents accidentental discharge by only allowing the handle to be depressed once a high amount of initial force is applied; by breaking, it allows the handle to subsequently be depressed more easily.
Many designs take advantage of the maintenance-free state of constant readiness. For example, a hydraulic dampener protecting a structure from earthquake damage could be secured with a shear pin. During normal conditions the system would be completely rigid, but when acted upon by the force of an earthquake the shear pin would break and the hydraulic dampening system would operate.
Their high reliability and low cost make them very popular for use in weapons. A typical example is using shear pins in an explosive device. A shear pin can here hold a striker pin in place, preventing the striker pin from striking an initiator (primer) unless the correct force is applied. That force can be the acceleration of a rifle grenade being launched. The force would snap the shear pin, allowing the striker pin to move backwards onto a primer, which in turn ignites a pyrotechnic delay composition for auto destruction. In this use shear pins prevent the striker pin from hitting the primer during handling or if the grenade was dropped by accident. Additionally, shear-pins are frequently used in anti-tank mine fuzes, to prevent them from being triggered by much lighter, non-target vehicles such as motorcycles. Typically, the shear-pin in an anti-tank mine is designed to snap (and release the spring-loaded firing pin) when a weight in excess of 150 kilograms is applied to the pressure plate.