For a long time before the second half of the twentieth century, the concept of a single stage to orbit vehicle was rarely considered, and when it was it was generally considered to be impractical and therefore very little research was conducted into the concept. However, advancements in flight technology led to the idea becoming more plausible, and during the 1960s some of the first concept designs for this kind of craft began to emerge.
Phil Bono (Douglas Space), Daniel Koelle of MBB and Edward Gomersall(NASA Ames)were among the earlier proponents of SSTO designs. One of the earliest was the One stage Orbital Space Truck (OOST) designed by Philip Bono, an engineer for Douglas Aircraft Company, which was a concept for an expendable booster stage which could deliver a payload to orbit in one stage. A reusable version named ROOST was also proposed. Another early SSTO design was a reusable launch vehicle named NEXUS which was designed by Krafft Arnold Ehricke in the early 1960s. It was one of the largest space craft ever conceptualized with a diameter of over fifty metres and the capability to lift up to two thousand short tons into Earth orbit, intended for missions to further out locations in the solar system such as Mars. The North American Air Augmented VTOVL from 1963 was a similarly large craft which would have used external burning ramjets to decrease the liftoff mass of the vehicle by removing the need for large amounts of liquid oxygen while travelling through the atmosphere.
From 1965, Robert Salked investigated various single stage to orbit spaceplane concepts, which would include wings. He proposed a vehicle which would burn hydrocarbon fuel while in the atmosphere and then switch to hydrogen fuel for increasing efficiency once in space. This was around the same time as the development of the space shuttle.
Further examples of Bono's early concepts (prior to the 1990s) which were never constructed include:
ROMBUS (Reusable Orbital Module, Booster, and Utility Shuttle), another design from Philip Bono. This wasn't technically single stage since it dropped some of its initial hydrogen tanks, but it came very close.
Ithacus, an adapted ROMBUS concept which was designed to carry soldiers and military equipment to other continents via a sub-orbital trajectory.
Pegasus, another adapted ROMBUS concept designed to carry passengers and payloads long distances in short amounts of time via space.
SASSTO, another launch vehicle concept.
Hyperion, yet another Philip Bono concept which used a sled to build up speed before liftoff to save on the amount of fuel which had to be lifted into the air.
Around 1985 the NASP project was intended to create a scramjet vehicle to reach orbit, but this had its funding stopped and was cancelled. At around the same time, the HOTOL tried to use precooled jet engine technology, but failed to show significant advantages over rocket technology.