Taking the size effect into account is essential for safe prediction of strength of large concrete bridges, nuclear containments, roof shells, tall buildings, tunnel linings, large load-bearing parts of aircraft, spacecraft and ships made of fiber-polymer composites, wind turbines, large geotechnical excavations, earth and rock slopes, ﬂoating sea ice carrying loads, oil platforms under ice forces, etc. Their design depends on the material properties measured on much smaller laboratory specimens. These properties must be extrapolated to sizes greater by one or two orders of magnitude. Even if an expensive full-scale failure test, for example a failure test of the rudder of a very large aircraft, can be carried out, it is financially prohibitive to repeat it thousand times to obtain the statistical distribution of load capacity. Such statistical information, underlying the safety factors, is obtainable only by proper extrapolation of laboratory tests.
The size effect is gaining in importance as larger and larger structures, of more and more slender forms, are being built. The safety factors, of course, give large safety margins—so large that even for the largest civil engineering structures the classical deterministic analysis based on the mean material properties normally yields failure loads smaller than the maximum design loads. For this reasons, the size effect on the strength in brittle failures of concrete structures and structural laminates has long been ignored. Then, however, the failure probability, which is required to be



<

10

−
6




{\displaystyle <10^{-6}}
, and actually does have such values for normal-size structures, may become for very large structures as low as




10

−
3




{\displaystyle 10^{-3}}
per lifetime. Such high failure probability is intolerable as it adds significantly to the risks to which people are inevitably exposed. In fact, the historical experience shows that very large structures have been failing at a frequency several orders of magnitude higher than smaller ones. The reason it has not led to public outcry is that the large structures are few. But for the locals, who must use the structures daily, the risk is not acceptable.
Another application is the testing of the fracture energy and characteristic material length. For quasibrittle materials, measuring the size effect on the peak loads (and on the specimen softening after the peak load) is the simplest approach.
Knowing the size effect is also important in the reverse sense—for micrometer scale devices if they are designed partly of fully on the basis of material properties measured more conveniently on the scale of 0.01m to 0.1m.