As aforementioned, slipspace travel is, when measured by faster-than-light standards, slow. It can take weeks or months to travel from system to system, the inefficiencies of the Shaw-Fujikawa engine compounding the problems. A craft that travels through slipspace appears to travel faster than light to an outside observer, however, relative to the slipspace field, the velocity is mathematically indeterminate. This being a consequence of the complicated definition of space-time within the slipspace filed. The craft does not travel through normal space, but around it.
The Shaw-Fujikawa drive also requires ships to enter and exit slipspace as far away from other masses as possible, as even the gravity of another ship can make slipspace calculations impossible. Because of this, an organized fleet of ships entering slipstream will exit into normal space haphazardly. The Covenant also seem able to read the slipstream currents better than the United Nations Space Command(UNSC), allowing them to move faster, more precisely, and within a gravity well. This also allows them to move their entire fleets in battle-ready formations, giving them an advantage in conflicts against the UNSC. However, the UNSC's post-war flagship, the UNSC Infinity, is capable of precision slipspace maneuvers and exiting near large mass due to her Mark X Macedon/Z-PROTOTYPE #78720HDS, which was built with Forerunner technology. This ability was demonstrated at the Second Battle of Requiem where the Infinity dropped out of slipspace and immediately rammed a Covenant Capital Warship, while sustaining negligible damage.
The slipspace ruptures caused by large ships, such as Covenant Assault Carriers create a massive detonation if used inside an atmosphere, due to the annihilation of antimatter produced by the rupture closing. One of these detonations is the one that damaged New Mombasa and caused an EMP that shut down the ODST drop pods at the beginning of Halo 3: ODST.
Another limitation of slipspace travel as stated in the Halo universe, is that whenever a ship carrying plutonium for use in nuclear weapons enters normal space a large amount of Cherenkov Radiation is released which can alert any nearby forces of the slipspace re-entry.
Ships in slipspace are not immune to detection from vessels in the normal plane, as hinted at by Cortana at the start of Halo 2; she informs Lord Hood, OC the MAC Platform Cairo, that "whispers" had been detected near Io, immediately before the confirmed arrival of a small Covenant battlegroup. If the battlegroup made no detour before arrival, no kind of signal, not even "whispers" traversing outside slipspace, could have been detected before the battlegroup's arrival, as it would be subject to the speed of light. (This was later found out that in Halo 2 annerversary terminals that the Covenant left slipspace at IO.) As well as humans are able to send "drones" into slip space to loosely monitor currents and objects traveling through them, obtaining rough, and often unrecognizable images (as mentioned in the books). Though this may be explained not by monitoring it from normal space, but because the Covenant's tactics often involved periodically dropping out of slipspace for an unknown reason(shown in Halo:Fall of Reach), possibly to observe the enemy before choosing to attack, and they dropped out by the UNSC base on Io.
By the year 2553 however, the UNSC had reverse-engineered numerous Forerunner and Covenant technologies for their own advancement, including vast improvements in slipspace drives. Before 2553, the standard estimates for space travel times for crossing the galaxy were led by the Forerunner, who were able to make such a trip in mere days or even minutes, while Covenant ships would take many months, and human ships years. Post 2553, with the addition of the UNSC Infinity and other technologies throughout the fleets, Humanity is now at least level with Covenant speeds. Perhaps human innovativeness and natural ability with Forerunner tech will allow humanity to develop advanced slipspace travel similar to that of the Forerunner and the Ancient Human Empire speeds. As previously stated, this will allow travelers to reach any point within the Milky Way in less than two days.
Neither Human nor Covenant ship mounted weapons are of any use in slipspace nor are there any weapons they possess that are capable of attacking vessels in slipspace. (Although there are now a few notable exceptions.) The only such weapons known were developed by the Forerunner in the form of the defensive line installations designed to prevent flood-infected ships from penetrating protected Forerunner space. One of these installations was encountered when Covenant ships were shot out of slipspace along with a trailing UNSC ship. An exception to the vessel-mounted weapons was when a commandeered Covenant vessel entered a strange form of relativistic slipspace in which they could still engage and be engaged by enemy ships. Additionally, during the Second Battle of Requiem (2557), the UNSC Infinity was secured to the planet by a slipspace connection acting as anchor, with Dr. Halsey stating there are many things that they do not yet understand about the nature of slipspace.