Silts, sands and gravels are classified by their size, and hence they may consist of a variety of minerals. Owing to the stability of quartz compared to other rock minerals, quartz is the most common constituent of sand and silt. Mica, and feldspar are other common minerals present in sands and silts. The mineral constituents of gravel may be more similar to that of the parent rock.
The common clay minerals are montmorillonite or smectite, illite, and kaolinite or kaolin. These minerals tend to form in sheet or plate like structures, with length typically ranging between 10−7 m and 4x10−6 m and thickness typically ranging between 10−9 m and 2x10−6 m, and they have a relatively large specific surface area. The specific surface area (SSA) is defined as the ratio of the surface area of particles to the mass of the particles. Clay minerals typically have specific surface areas in the range of 10 to 1,000 square meters per gram of solid. Due to the large surface area available for chemical, electrostatic, and van der Waals interaction, the mechanical behavior of clay minerals is very sensitive to the amount of pore fluid available and the type and amount of dissolved ions in the pore fluid. To anticipate the effect of clay on the way a soil will behave, it is necessary to know the kinds of clays as well as the amount present. As home builders and highway engineers know all too well, soils containing certain high-activity clays make very unstable material on which to build because they swell when wet and shrink when dry. This shrink-and-swell action can easily crack foundations and cause retaining walls to collapse. These clays also become extremely sticky and difficult to work with when they are wet. In contrast, low-activity clays, formed under different conditions, can be very stable and easy to work with.
The minerals of soils are predominantly formed by atoms of oxygen, silicon, hydrogen, and aluminum, organized in various crystalline forms. These elements along with calcium, sodium, potassium, magnesium, and carbon constitute over 99 per cent of the solid mass of soils.