^Basic propositions (click here to return to main)
General relativity asserts that "action-at-a-distance" does not exist. The motions of a satellite orbiting the Earth are not dictated by distant forces exerted by the Earth, Moon and Sun. Rather, the satellite is always following a straight line in its local inertial frame.
Each particle's local frame varies from point to point as a result of the curvature of spacetime.
General relativity is based on two central propositions: (1) The laws of physics cannot depend on what coordinate system one uses. (2) In any sufficiently small region of space, the effects of gravitation are the same as those from acceleration. This second proposition is the equivalence principle.
^Curvature of time (click here to return to main)
Gravitational fields make it impossible to construct a global inertial frame, as is required by special relativity.
A photon climbing in Earth's gravitational field loses energy and is redshifted.
The gravitational redshift implies that gravity makes time run slower. This amounts to a statement that time is curved.
The prediction of curved time is not unique to general relativity. Rather, it is predicted by any theory of gravitation that respects the principle of equivalence.
Newtonian gravitation is a theory of curved time. General relativity is a theory of curved time and curved space.
^Curvature of space (click here to return to main)
Curvature of time completely accounts for all Newtonian gravitational effects.
There are curvature terms for the spatial components of the invariant interval as well, but the effects on planetary orbits and the like are tiny. This is because the speeds of planets and satellites in their orbits are very much slower than the speed of light.
Nevertheless, Urbain Le Verrier, in 1859, was able to demonstrate discrepancies in the orbit of Mercury from that predicted by Newton's laws.
Einstein showed that this discrepancy, the anomalous precession of Mercury, is explained by the spatial terms in the curvature of spacetime.
For light, the spatial terms in the invariant interval are comparable in magnitude to the temporal term, so the effects of the curvature of space are comparable to the effects of the curvature of time.
The famous 1919 Eddington eclipse expedition showed that the bending of light around the Sun includes a component explained by the curvature of space.
^Sources of spacetime curvature (click here to return to main)
In Newton's theory of gravitation, the only source of gravitational force is mass. In contrast, general relativity identifies several sources of spacetime curvature in addition to mass: Mass-energy density, momentum density, pressure, and shear stress.
Gravity itself is a source of gravity.
Moving or rotating masses can generate gravitomagnetic fields analogous to the magnetic fields generated by moving charges.
Pressure as a source of gravity leads to dramatic differences between the predictions of general relativity versus those of Newtonian gravitation.
Experiment has verified the ability of pressure and momentum to act as sources of spacetime curvature. Only stress has eluded experimental verification as a source of spacetime curvature, although mathematical consistency of the Einstein field equations demands that it acts so.
Return to Introduction