^Spacetime interval (click here to return to main)
Time by itself and length by itself are not invariants, since observers in relative motion will disagree on the time between events or the distance between events.
On the other hand, observers in relative motion will agree on the measure of a particular combination of distance and time called the "spacetime interval."
Spacetime intervals can be positive, negative or zero. Particles moving at the speed of light have zero spacetime intervals and do not age.
Spacetime diagrams are typically drawn with only a single space and a single time coordinate. The time axis is scaled by



c


{\displaystyle c}
so that the space and time coordinates have the same units (meters).
^Reference frames (click here to return to main)
To simplify analyses of two reference frames in relative motion, Galilean (i.e. conventional 3-space) diagrams of the frames may be set in a standard configuration with aligned axes whose origins coincide when t = 0.
A spacetime diagram in standard configuration is typically drawn with only a single space and a single time coordinate. The "unprimed frame" will have orthogonal x and ct axes. The axes of the "primed frame" will share a common origin with the unprimed axes, but its x' and ct' axes will be inclined by equal and opposite angles from the x and ct axes.
Although the axes of the unprimed frame are orthogonal and the axes of the primed frame are inclined, the frames are actually equivalent. The asymmetry is due to unavoidable mapping distortions, and should be considered no stranger than the mapping distortions that occur, say, when mapping a spherical Earth onto a flat map.
^Light cone (click here to return to main)
On a spacetime diagram, two 45° diagonal lines crossing the origin represent light signals to and from the origin. In a diagram with an extra space direction, the diagonal lines form a "light cone".
The light cone divides spacetime into a "timelike future" (separated from the origin by more time than space), a "timelike past", and an "elsewhere" region (separated from the origin by a "spacelike" interval with more space than time).
Events in the future and past light cones are causally related to the origin. Events in the elsewhere region do not have a causal relationship with the origin.
^Relativity of simultaneity (click here to return to main)
If two events are timelike separated (causally related), then their before-after ordering is fixed for all observers.
If two events are spacelike separated (non-causally related), then different observers with different relative motions may have reverse judgments on which event occurred before the other.
Simultaneous events are necessarily spacelike separated.
The spacetime interval between two simultaneous events gives the "proper distance". The spacetime interval measured along a world line gives the "proper time".
^Invariant hyperbola (click here to return to main)
In a plane, the set of points equidistant from the origin form a circle.
In a spacetime diagram, a set of points at a fixed spacetime interval from the origin forms an invariant hyperbola.
The loci of points at constant spacelike and timelike intervals from the origin form timelike and spacelike invariant hyperbolae.
^Time dilation and length contraction (click here to return to main)
If frame S' is in relative motion to frame S, its ct' axis is tilted with respect to ct.
Because of this tilt, one light-second on the ct' axis maps to greater than one light-second on the ct axis. Likewise, one light-second on the ct axis maps to greater than one light-second on the ct' axis. Each observer measures the other's clocks as running slow.
The world sheet of a rod one light-second in length aligned parallel to the x' axis projects to less than one light-second on the x axis. Likewise, the world sheet of a rod one light-second in length aligned parallel to the x axis projects to less than one light-second on the x' axis. Each observer measures the other's rulers as being foreshortened.
^Mutual time dilation and the twin paradox (click here to return to main)
^Mutual time dilation (click here to return to main)
To beginners, mutual time dilation seems self-contradictory because two observers in relative motion will each measure the other's clock as running more slowly.
Careful consideration of how time measurements are performed reveals that there is no inherent necessity for the two observers' measurements to be reciprocally "consistent."
In order to measure the rate of ticking of one of B's clocks, observer A must use two of his own clocks to record the time where B's clock made a first tick, and the time where B's clock made a second tick, so that a grand total of three clocks are involved in the measurement. Conversely, observer B uses three clocks to measure the rate of ticking of one of A's clocks. A and B are not doing the same measurement with the same clocks.
^Twin paradox (click here to return to main)
In the twin paradox, one twin A makes a journey into space in a high-speed rocket, returning home to find that the twin B who remained on Earth has aged more.
The twin paradox is not a paradox because the twins' paths through spacetime are not equivalent.
Throughout both the outbound and the inbound legs of the traveling twin's journey, A measures B's clocks as running slower than A's own. But during the turnaround, a shift takes place in the events of A's world line that B considers to be simultaneous with his own.
^Gravitation (click here to return to main)
In the absence of gravity, spacetime is flat, is uniform throughout, and serves as nothing more than a static background for the events that take place in it.
Gravity greatly complicates the description of spacetime. In general relativity, spacetime is no longer a static background, but actively interacts with the physical systems that it contains.
Return to Introduction