In The Flash, the Speed Force is initially referenced as the source of the Flash's speed in the season one episode "Tricksters". As the season continues, it is revealed that Eobard Thawne was trapped in the past when his attempt to kill a younger version of Barry disrupted time to such an extent that it damaged his connection to the Speed Force, requiring him to take on the identity of Harrison Wells to ensure that Barry would become the Flash earlier than he did in the original course of events, 'Wells' subsequently pretending to have been crippled in an accident so that he can remain in a wheelchair that is equipped with a generator intended to draw on Barry's excess Speed Force energy to supplant Wells/Thawne's damaged link. It plays a more significant role in the events of season two. In "The Runaway Dinosaur", it is revealed to have brought Barry to its realm to regain his powers, the Speed Force appears before him in manifestations of Joe West, Iris West, and Barry's parents. The season also introduces specter-like beings called Time Wraiths that are enforcers of the Speed Force, who captured Zoom and converted into the Black Flash to hunt other speedsters who callously break the rules of time-travel without forethought.
In the third season, it is revealed that new villain Savitar was trapped in the Speed Force at some point in Barry's future and Savitar's past, trapped in a prison where he experiences his greatest torment, only able to manifest in the real world for brief periods until he tricks Wally West into providing him with the means of escape, trapping Wally in his own prison. Barry returns to the Speed Force to retrieve Wally, though the Speed Force was less willing to help him since he caused Flashpoint. The Speed Force manifests before Barry in the forms of those who died because of Barry's actions: Eddie Thawne, Ronnie Raymond, and Leonard Snart. Barry is only able to save Wally when his ally the real Jay Garrick volunteers to remain in the prison in Wally's place, understanding the Speed Force is telling him to deal with Savitar instead of having others fight his battle. At the conclusion of the third season, Barry is able to free Jay from the prison to get his help fighting Savitar, but after his foe is defeated, Barry agrees to return to the Speed Force to face his 'punishment' for his role in the creation of Flashpoint. He is returned to Earth in the first episode of the fourth season when his allies work out a way to breach the Speed Force while 'tricking' it into believing that he is still there, Barry's mind initially addled by his time in the Speed Force before he regains his focus and is revealed to have become even faster than he was before his imprisonment.