The Speed Force is a concept presented in various comic books published by DC Comics, primarily in relation to the various speedsters in the DC Universe. The Speed Force was the extra-dimensional energy that once powered all of the Flashes' superhuman abilities. It is not like any other fundamental force. Its origin is likely the same as most superhuman abilities found in the DC Universe, a byproduct of The Godwave created by the mysterious omni-energy known as The Source.
The ability to gain a connection to the Speed Force has been limited to only a few individuals in the DC Universe.
The Speed Force has most often been discovered or accessed by accident and almost every speedster in the DC universe can access it, except for Jay Garrick (Earth 2 series) who got his powers from a blessing by the god Mercury.
Barry Allen and Wally West acquired their powers from an accident in a laboratory (later retconned to be Barry traveling through time to give his powers to himself) (Pre-Crisis)
Bart Allen acquired his ability to access the Speed Force genetically, but had to be subjected to experimentation to prevent his power from hyper-accelerating him into old age.
Professor Zoom/The Reverse Flash, also known as Eobard Thawne, was able to use technology to recreate the ability to access the Speed Force in the distant future. By doing this, he created the Negative Speed Force, the destructive opposite of the original Speed Force. The Negative Speed Force is generated by Professor Zoom/The Reverse Flash when he runs. Thawne infected Barry Allen with the Negative Speed Force, for a time.
Others have had unique origins or specialized technologies or powers which gave them limited access to the Speed Force and the powers therein.
The Speed Force concept has been altered, remixed, rehashed and rewritten over the twenty years it has been in use. As of 2011's "The New 52" reboot, the new parameters of the Speed Force revolve around accessing and controlling the motion and progression of the universe, of moving time and space itself forward. All references are from the Pre-Crisis, Post-Crisis, and Zero Hour continuities. The Post-Flashpoint Multiverse is not included.