Drivers are required to drive at a safe speed for conditions. In the United States, this requirement is referred to as the basic rule, but more generally in Britain and elsewhere in common law as the reasonable man requirement. The German Highway Code (Straßenverkehrs-Ordnung) section on speed begins with a statement which may be rendered in English:

Any person driving a vehicle may only drive so fast that the car is under control. Speeds must be adapted to the road, traffic, visibility and weather conditions as well as the personal skills and characteristics of the vehicle and load.

In France the law clarifies that even if speed is limited by law and by local authority, the driver assumes the responsibility to control his vehicle’s speed, and to reduce speed in various circumstances, such as overtaking a pedestrian, or bicycles, individually or in a group, when overtaking a stopped convoy, when passing a transportation vehicle loading or unloading people or children, in any case where road does not appear clear, or risky, when visibility is low (rain, fog, ...), in turns, when the road goes rapidly down, in road sections that are small, busy, or with homes, near the top of the road, near a crossing when visibility is not sure, when specific lights are used, when overtaking animals. According to the same article, the fact for a driver to not keep master of its speed or to not reduce it in such cases is penalized.
The US federal government has a similar law—49 CFR 392.14—which applies in all states as permitted under by the commerce clause and due process clause.; for example California Vehicle Code section 22350 which states that "No person shall drive a vehicle upon a highway at a speed greater than is reasonable ... and in no event at a speed which endangers the safety of persons or property".
The basic speed law is almost always supplemented by specific maximum or minimum limits, but applies regardless. The reasonable speed may be different than the posted speed limit in conditions such as fog, heavy rain, ice, snow, gravel, sharp corners, blinding glare, darkness, crossing traffic, or when there is an obstructed view of orthogonal traffic—such as by road curvature, parked cars, vegetation, or snow banks—thus limiting the Assured Clear Distance Ahead (ACDA). Basic speed laws are statutized reinforcements of the centuries-old common law negligence doctrine as specifically applied to vehicular speed.