In European markets, General Motors Europe sometimes allow certain high-powered Opel or Vauxhall cars to exceed the 250 km/h (155 mph) mark, whereas their Cadillacs do not. The Chrysler 300C SRT8 is limited to 270 km/h. Most Japanese domestic market vehicles are limited to 180 km/h (112 mph) or 190 km/h (118 mph).
BMW, Mercedes and others have entered into a gentlemen's agreement to a limit of 250 km/h (155 mph), but may 'unhook' their speed limited cars in Europe, and Mercedes will provide some vehicles in the USA without limiters for an additional price. There are also third-party companies who will re-flash vehicle computers with new software which will remove the speed limits and improve overall performance.
Many small and medium-sized commercial vehicles are now routinely fitted with speed limiters as a manufacturer option, with a mind towards reducing fuel bills, maintenance costs and insurance premiums, as well as discouraging employees from abusing company vehicles, in addition to curbing speeding fines and bad publicity. These limiters are often set considerably lower than for passenger cars, typically at 56, 62, 68 or 70 mph (90, 100, 109 or 113 km/h) in the UK, with options for 75 and 81 km/h (47 and 50 mph) listed in countries where these speeds are legal. Often the fitting of a limiter is combined with a small warning sticker on the rear of the vehicle, stating its maximum speed, to discourage drivers who may themselves be delayed by having to follow it from tailgating or other aggressive driving intended to intimidate the lead driver into accelerating.
Similarly, most electric cars and vans which are not inherently limited by a low power output or "short" gearing tend to implement a maximum speed cap via their power controllers, to prevent the rapid loss of battery charge and corresponding reduction in range caused by the much greater power demands of high speeds; for example, the Smart ED, Nissan Leaf, Mitsubishi MiEV, and the Citroen Berlingo EV. The limits are typically in line with those of other deliberately limited vehicles, for a balance that does not overly compromise either range or travel time; e.g. 90 km/h for the Berlingo, 100~120 km/h for the Smart (depending on version). The Leaf is an unusual case, being instead limited to a much higher 145 km/h (90 mph).
Some small economy cars have limiters, because of stability and other safety concerns (short crumple zones, etc.), and to safeguard their small engines from the prolonged overrevving required to produce the power to achieve higher speeds. The first generation Smart was limited to 135 km/h (84 mph) (later generations were unlimited), and the Mitsubishi i to 130 km/h (81 mph).
Some heavy goods vehicle operators (typically big-name retailers, rather than haulage contractors) further reduce their HGV limiters from 90 km/h to a lower speed, typically 85 or 80 km/h (53 or 50 mph), in a claimed bid to reduce fuel consumption and emissions. This is again often highlighted by a warning sticker on the truck's tailgate.