As the DCU Reboot took effect the attributes of the Speed Force had been changed dramatically, now being more than just the source of all speed and motion, but also a force of accelerating progression and development. Its main function is to serve as the driving force that pushes the world forward. It will often grant powers to those it touches that can best utilize its gifts. Instead of simply being about rapid motion, the Force can also be used as a means to control the flow of time such as pushing time forward or even backward at will.
Super-Speed – held mainly by Barry Allen and Wally West, Traveling at any speed at which one believes they can move.
Electricity Manipulation – All users of the Speed Force generate electrical energy from their body. This lightning varies in color from yellow, red, blue, green, black and white. The brighter the lightning can be, the more powerful the speedster. Barry Allen and Wally West have been shown to project this lightning from their hands as electric bolts.
Technological Augmentation - Used by Albert Lim. Accelerate the potentiality of any and all technology within tactile vicinity, and can cause them to malfunction or short circuit.
Space-Time Migration - Used by Xolani/Folded Man. Enables him to compress chronouranic fields in order to shorten distances and transport oneself near instantly to any desired location.
Vibration Manipulation - Utilized by both The Flash and Marissa Rennie, utilization of a host of effects, such as using it to phase through solid objects while moving at super speed. One runs the danger of causing objects to explode if vibrating at the wrong frequency, while others can use such an aspect to their advantage creating shockwaves with which to knock over buildings.
Accelerated Brain-Activity/Speed Mind - Used by Flash and Solovar. The acceleration of mental capacity enables the user to percive and interact with a host of possible/probable outcomes that can happen within a given setting of choices. The mind is able to compute the numerous ways any set path taken can result in using a form of advanced Choice-Causality perception to predict most actions taken.
Metabolism Augmentation - Gifted to Floyd Gomez, accelerates and re-purposes the body's metabolic rate to enhance physical conditioning giving them a host of augmentations.
Mental Evolution - How the Light can effect a host of users. A great many individuals touched by the Speed Force have their intelligence evolved and accelerated to the point of supergenius acumen and various psionic powers. The Apes of Gorilla City are one such evolved society because of this, elder simians of their culture will grow into various mental capabilities with time and age such as telepathy and clairvoyance, taken to its evolutionary extreme; in the case of Gorilla Grodd, they can also achieve telekinesis strong enough to rip aviary devices from the sky.
Chronokinesis - used by Flash, Reverse-Flash and Professor Zoom, singular ability to adjust personalized timestream in order change the outcome of events. Slowing it, reversing it speeding it up and even time traveling.
Age Manipulation - A user can control the progression of time around others or themselves, restoring one's youth or withering them into old age.
Molecular Acceleration - cause enough molecular agitation within matter to create an explosive reaction.
Speed Steal - used by Wally West Wally has the ability to Steal the Speed and momentum from objects.
Time Travel - Used by Savitar, Professor Zoom and Reverse-Flash. Users have the ability to traverse the rivers of time to reach the past, present and future at will.
Speed Force Theft - used by Godspeed, Flash, and Kid-Flash. Users have the ability to drain away the Speed Force from those whose DNA wasn't completely bonded to the Speed Force. If the process is done forcibly or against a Speedster/s will, they will die after and the user who drained their speed will be injured. If the Speed Force is willingly relinquished, no harmful/deadly side effects will occur.
Speed Scout - used by Godspeed. A user can divide the Speed Force within themselves and create a copy of the user. If the copy is around for too long, the Speed Force will cause the user pain, the copy will destabilise, and return to the original.