The International Speed Skydiving Association rules have altered over the years to accommodate the changes necessary. Some Speed Skydiving jargon involved is:
The Measurement Zone: A vertical kilometer where speed measurements are taken. It starts at 2,700 m and ends at 1,700 m above the ground
The Speed Measuring Device: Measurements are made by two free fall computers (Pro-Tracks) placed on the lateral webbing or in a line from it on the competitors rig.
Speed Measurement: Speed is averaged over the measurement zone using two Pro-Tracks.
Qualification Jump: Minimum qualification speed for men is 300 km/h and 250 km/h for women. The result is not used in the competition itself.
Qualified Competitor: One who has met or exceeded the speed requirements, or who has previously participated in a competition qualifies to compete.
Qualified Meet: No special conditions.
Out of Boundaries(OB): When the speed difference between 2 Pro-Tracks is greater than 30 km/h
Qualified Jump: Exit altitude is about 4,000 meters.
Meet Result: The average of the best competition jumps, depending on the number of rounds completed
The competition is held over a course of 3–4 days. Every competition consists of 6 individual rounds. The best 3 rounds are considered for the meet result (average speed). Out of bounds runs will result in a zero and there is no limitation to how many OBs a competitor can have, although they will affect the average result.
The judges in speed skydiving competitions are the speed measuring devices, although the ISSA race commission will check each competitor to ensure that their gear is acceptable. Anything found dangerous is prohibited, as are the use of weights. The Race Commission is elected before every meet and is composed of a representative of every country competing. Their job is to ensure that both the competition and competitors follow the rules. They have no authority to change the rules, and refer to the FAI/PC Sporting Code. There is also a download team responsible for measuring the device handling, data download, and documentation of the use of the devices.