The possible signals of Lorentz violation in any experiment can be calculated from the SME. It has therefore proven to be a remarkable tool in the search for Lorentz violation across the landscape of experimental physics. Up until the present, experimental results have taken the form of upper bounds on the SME coefficients. Since the results will be numerically different for different inertial reference frames, the standard frame adopted for reporting results is the Sun-centered frame. This frame is a practical and appropriate choice, since it is accessible and inertial on the time scale of hundreds of years.
Typical experiments seek couplings between the background fields and various particle properties such as spin, or propagation direction. One of the key signals of Lorentz violation arises because experiments on Earth are unavoidably rotating and revolving relative to the Sun-centered frame. These motions lead to both annual and sidereal variations of the measured coefficients for Lorentz violation. Since the translational motion of the Earth around the Sun is nonrelativistic, annual variations are typically suppressed by a factor 10−4. This makes sidereal variations the leading time-dependent effect to look for in experimental data.

Measurements of SME coefficients have been done with experiments involving:
birefringence and dispersion from cosmological sources
clock-comparison measurements
CMB polarization
collider experiments
electromagnetic resonant cavities
equivalence principle
gauge and Higgs particles
high-energy astrophysical observations
laboratory and gravimetric tests of gravity
matter interferometry
neutrino oscillations
oscillations and decays of K, B, D mesons
particle-antiparticle comparisons
post-newtonian gravity in the solar system and beyond
second- and third-generation particles
space-based missions
spectroscopy of hydrogen and antihydrogen
spin-polarized matter.
All experimental results for SME coefficients are tabulated in the Data Tables for Lorentz and CPT Violation.