As portrayed in the fictional universe of Stargate, wormhole physics is a field of study that describes the functioning of stargates and wormholes. It was pioneered by Samantha Carter. In the episode "Upgrades", possessing super-human abilities Carter wrote an entire book on the subject, claiming she had been wanting to write it for a long time previously but had never been able to find the time as it was such an incredibly complex subject.
Energy to maintain an established wormhole can come from either side, though the energy to form a wormhole can only come from the dialing stargate.
Substantial gravitational force can pass through a wormhole from either side. (i.e., the effects of a black hole).
Outgoing wormholes can be affected by exterior gravitational and electromagnetic forces, causing them to connect to stargates other than their intended targets.
When traveling from one gate to another, exterior forces such as solar flares can cause the wormhole to connect to a Stargate in another time period. In this case, the wormhole will then sometimes, under some unknown circumstances, connect to the source stargate. (to source gate: "1969", "2010" and "Time", to another gate: "The Last Man", Stargate: Continuum).
Matter can only travel one way but weak energy such as radio communication can travel both ways through a Stargate. This can be explained by the hypothesis that the diameter of the wormhole is very small, possibly microscopic in size. Energy would have no problem passing through on its own but matter would need to be converted into energy and then re-integrated at the other side. Radio communications cannot pass through a wormhole traveling to a nine-chevron address (e.g. between Earth and Destiny, per "Twin Destinies.)
Artificial wormholes created by Stargates can only stay open for up to 38 minutes without an extremely powerful energy source powering the dialing gate. Such as "an infinite number of ZPMs or a black hole". (Dr. McKay, "First Strike") After 38 minutes relativistic effects come into play. No matter can be transmitted through a wormhole after 38 minutes as it is presumed unsafe.
The Stargate Atlantis series finale demonstrates the wormhole drive, essentially taking the Stargate concept and applying it to an interstellar vessel. The drive allows Atlantis to move from the edge of the Milky Way galaxy to Earth in moments, similar to a Stargate, but uses a tremendous amount of power. It also requires precise calculation to successfully arrive at the target destination without destroying the ship.