Although basic principles of sticky pads are simple, physics behind may be complex due to many specific and sometimes conflicting requirements arising from practical use. Mechanisms involved in high friction materials go beyond simple Coulomb friction.   These can be combined by other mechanisms such as energy dissipation in viscous materials or adhesion.
The above requirements impose many design challenges. To operate well on vibrating surfaces, pads are usually made of soft, rubber like materials with very high friction coefficients. Designs seek to achieve certain level of adhesion (e.g. for use on vertical or very steep surfaces) without compromising easy detachment and continuous use without residual left-over. Some applications (such as sticking smartphones or tablets to vertical surface) require high degree of reliability, which is difficult to achieve without strong sticking to the surfaces.
Various innovative approaches and engineered materials are used to keep in line with requirements. Some designs apply sticking based on vacuum in addition to high friction and softness (see e.g. micro-suction tapes).  Other development includes designs that find inspiration in nature, especially in animals that are able to climb walls and ceilings such as geckos,      various species of insects  , tree frogs  , or chameleons  .
Mechanisms of insects that can scale walls and ceilings help understand how to produce surfaces with extremely high friction that don't exhibit too much sticking for practical applications. Abilities of geckos have been intensively studied to find out how sticking of vertical walls or ceilings can be joined with ability of easy and quick detachment that enables geckos quick movement. It has been discovered that Van der Waals force rather than friction or adhesion is the most important mechanism behind gecko's abilities. This implies that artificial designs mimicking geckos' feet should rely on maximizing surface contact between object and the pad, which is less practical in some situations, for example when pads are used on non-flat surfaces or when objects put on the pad don't have flat surfaces. On the other hand, mechanisms in geckos' feet help design materials with reliable sticking and easy detachment at the same time. Mechanisms used in geckos, tree frogs and some insects were also studied for self-cleaning ability, which would enable artificial materials retain the ability to prevent sliding after continuous use in dirty environments.