The energy transfer hypothesis states that the more energy that is transferred to the target, the greater the destructive potential.
Kinetic energy is a function of mass and the square of velocity. Generally speaking, it is the intention of the shooter to deliver an adequate amount of energy to the target via the projectiles. Projectiles such as rifle bullets, high velocity handgun bullets and shotgun slugs can over-penetrate. Projectiles such as handgun bullets and shot can under-penetrate. Projectiles that reach the target with too low a velocity or bird shot may not penetrate at all. All the above conditions affect energy transfer.
Over-penetration is detrimental to stopping power in regards to energy. This is because a bullet that passes through the target does not transfer all of its energy to the target. Despite decreased tissue damage due to loss of transferred energy on an over-penetrating shot, the resulting exit wound would cause increased blood loss and therefore a decrease in blood pressure in the victim. This effect on both persons and game animals is likely to be incapacitating over the length of the entire shooting event.
Under-penetration is also detrimental to stopping power. Projectiles that do not transfer enough energy to the target may fail to create a fatal wound cavity. Also vital organs may not be reached, thereby limiting the amount of tissue damage, blood loss or loss of blood pressure.
Non-penetration of projectiles may only deliver enough energy to create bruising, punctures and or blunt force trauma. All of which may result in internal injury solely through the force of the impact but not stop the target. A notable example of projectiles designed to deliver stopping power without target penetration are Flexible baton rounds (commonly known as "beanbag bullets"), a type of reduced-lethality ammunition.
As mentioned above, there are many factors that affect "stopping power". Within this theory energy transfer is related to destructive potential; however, the importance of energy transfer in determining the stopping power of projectiles (when compared to other factors like location of the wound and wound cavity size) is a controversial topic.
The force exerted by a projectile upon tissue is equal to the bullet's local rate of kinetic energy loss, with distance




d


E

k



/


d

x


{\displaystyle \mathrm {d} E_{k}/\mathrm {d} x}
(the first derivative of the bullets kinetic energy with respect to position). The ballistic pressure wave is proportional to this retarding force (Courtney and Courtney), and this retarding force is also the origin of both temporary cavitation and prompt damage (CE Peters).