Advantages in the game are such things as the character's Defense score, Health, Initiative, Morality, Size, Speed, and Willpower. Some derived Attributes are as follows:
Defense: is the negative Modifier an opponent gets when he tries to attack a character, which is equal to the number of Dots in the lower of Dexterity or Wits. It is exclusive to the Storytelling System.
Health: is how well the character copes with injury. In the Storytelling System, Health is equal to Stamina + Size. In the Storyteller System, characters almost universally have exactly 7 Health levels.
Initiative: is a measure of the character's reaction time. It is equal to Dexterity + Composure, and is exclusive to the Storytelling System.
Morality: is a measure of the character's sense of compassion toward their fellow man, and respect for the law. Morality has a base numerical value of 7, and can change higher or lower throughout the game depending on what the character does. It could rise for doing "good" things and lower for doing "evil". Losing morality can cause characters to gain derangement, and affects the self-control of certain supernatural creatures, such as vampires and werewolves. In the Storytelling System, all playable characters have a morality stat whose name changes with the setting (Morality for Humans, Humanity for Vampires, Harmony for Werewolves and so). In the Storyteller System, only Vampire: The Masquerade uses a morality system.
Size: is how big or small a character is. It is a numerical value, and for base humans, Size is equal to 5, and is reduced for smaller, and increased for larger sized creatures.
Willpower: a measure of a character's self-confidence and determination, and determines the size of a character's Temporary Willpower pool. In the Storytelling System, it is equal to Resolve + Composure, unless it has been temporarily lowered, in which case it can be bought back with experience. In the Storyteller System, Willpower is rated from 1 to 10, and the method of calculating a character's base Willpower rating varies by game line.