Streamers can emerge when a strong electric field is applied to an insulating material, typically a gas. Streamers can only form in areas where the electric field exceeds the dielectric strength (breakdown field, disruptive field) of the medium. For air at atmospheric pressure, this is roughly 30 kV per centimeter. The electric field accelerates the few electrons and ions that are always present in air, due to natural processes such as cosmic rays, radioactive decay, or photoionization. Ions are much heavier, so they move very slowly compared to electrons. As the electrons move through the medium, they collide with the neutral molecules or atoms. Important collisions are:
Elastic collisions, which change the direction of motion of the electrons.
Excitations, where the neutral particle is excited, and the electron loses the corresponding energy.
Impact ionization, where the neutral particle becomes ionized, with the incident electron losing the energy.
Attachment, where the electron attaches to the neutral to form a negative ion.
When the electric field approaches the breakdown field, the electrons gain enough energy between collisions to ionize the gas atoms, knocking an electron off the atom. At the breakdown field, there is a balance between the production of new electrons (due to impact ionization) and the loss of electrons (due to attachment). Above the breakdown field, the number of electrons starts to grow exponentially, and an electron avalanche (Townsend avalanche) forms.
The electron avalanches leave behind positive ions, so in time more and more space charge is building up. (Of course, the ions move away in time, but this a relatively slow process compared to the avalanche generation). Eventually, the electric field from all the space charge becomes comparable to the background electric field. This is sometimes referred to as the "avalanche to streamer transition". In some regions the total electric field will be smaller than before, but in other regions it will get larger, which is called electric field enhancement. New avalanches predominantly grow in the high-field regions, so a self-propagating structure can emerge: a streamer.