A pilot would usually only have the target in his sights for a fleeting moment, so a concentration of bullets was vital for achieving a "kill". Even flimsy First World War aircraft often took a surprisingly large number of hits to shoot down: later and larger aircraft were much harder propositions again. There were two obvious solutions: to fit a more efficient gun with a higher cyclic rate of fire or increase the number of guns carried. Both of these measures impinged on the question of synchronization.

Early synchronized guns of the 1915–1917 period had a rate of fire in the region of 400 rounds per minute. At this comparatively leisurely rate of fire a synchronizer can be geared down to deliver a single firing impulse every two or three turns of the propeller, rendering it more reliable without unduly slowing the rate of fire. To control a faster gun, with, for example, a cyclic rate of 800 or 1,000 rounds a minute, it was necessary to supply at least one impulse (if not two) for every rotation of the propeller, making it more liable to failure. The intricate mechanism of a mechanical linkage system, especially of the "push rod" type, could easily shake itself to pieces when driven at this sort of speed.
The final version of the Fokker Eindecker, the Fokker E.IV, came with two lMG 08 "Spandau" machine guns and this armament became standard for all the German D-type scouts starting with the Albatros D.I. From the appearance of the Sopwith Camel and the SPAD S.XIII in mid-1917 right through to the end of gun synchronization in the 1950s, a twin gun installation was the international norm. Having the two guns firing simultaneously would obviously not have been a satisfactory arrangement. The guns needed to both fire at the same point on the propeller disc, which means that one needed to fire a tiny fraction of a second later than the other. This is why early gears designed for a single machine gun needed to be modified in order to control two guns satisfactorily. In practice at least part of the mechanism had to be duplicated, even if the two weapons were not synchronized separately.