Natural units are physical units of measurement defined in terms of universal physical constants in such a manner that selected physical constants take on the numerical value of one when expressed in terms of those units. Natural units are so named because their definition relies on only properties of nature and not on any human construct. Various systems of natural units are possible.
Some other examples are as follows:
Geometric unit systems are useful in relativistic physics. In these systems the base physical units are chosen so that the speed of light and the gravitational constant are set equal to unity.
Planck units are a form of geometric units obtained by also setting Boltzmann's constant, the Coulomb force constant and the reduced Planck constant to unity. They are based only on properties of free space rather than any object or particle.
Stoney units are similar to Planck units but set the elementary charge to unity and allow Planck's constant to float (i.e. it is a number that has to be determined by experiment).
"Schrödinger" units are also similar to Planck units and also set the elementary charge to unity, but allow the speed of light to float.
Atomic units are a system of units used in atomic physics, particularly for describing the properties of electrons. The atomic units have been chosen such that several the constants relating to the electron are all equal to one. They are similar to "Schrödinger" units but set the electron mass to unity and allow the gravitational constant to float. The unit of energy in this system is the total energy of the electron in the Bohr atom and called the Hartree energy. The unit of length is the Bohr radius.
Electronic units are similar to Stoney units but set the electron mass to unity and allow the gravitational constant to float. They are also similar to atomic units but set the speed of light to unity and allow Planck's constant to float.
Quantum electrodynamical units are similar to the electronic system of units except that the proton mass is normalised rather than the electron mass.