In the Star Trek fictional universe, tachyons are among the fictitious or hypothetical particles frequently invoked in treknobabble, often as a deus ex machina used to maintain the plot. Tachyons are frequently invoked to explain some aspect of the Romulan cloaking device. In the film Star Trek: Insurrection, ships fire "tachyon pulses" at one another, disrupting the targets' "shield harmonics" and thereby allowing transport through the shields. Finally, in the third season Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode "Explorers", a tachyon stream was used as an (accidental) means to propel an ancient sailing ship to warp speed. Tachyons are also often mentioned throughout each series when a plot contains references to time travel or time manipulation. In "All Good Things...", the final episode of Star Trek: The Next Generation tachyons which were released cause a space-time fissure that threatens to destroy all life on Earth (along with the rest of the galaxy) in the distant past.
The Tom Baker-era Doctor Who story "The Leisure Hive" features a race called the Argolins who utilise tachyons for a cloning-like procedure and for "illusions" as such. The Argolin Pangol explains, "Tachyons travel faster than light. A tachyon field can therefore be made to reach point B – that visidome, say – before its departure from point A, the Generator." Romana says that the Time Lords "abandoned tachyonics when we developed warp matrix engineering".
Blake's 7 has the Season 3 episode "Orbit", where a scientist and his assistant have created the "Tachyon Funnel" — a powerful weapon that can destroy anything in the universe by harnessing the power of super-dense stellar matter. Events can be watched in real-time from the Funnel, and the demonstration destroys a star several light-years away.
In the series pilot of Eureka, scientist Walter Perkins creates a "tachyon accelerator", activates it, and as a result the laws of physics and the fabric of space-time itself begin to unravel. This is apparently due to a "tachyon collision" created by the machine. The effects are stopped by creating a second collision to counteract the first.
In the NBC series Journeyman, tachyons have been mentioned as a theory, possibly explaining the mysterious trips through time experienced by Dan Vasser.
In the 2009-2010 season series FlashForward, Lloyd Simcoe's ability to discover the month of a second global blackout depends on his ability to decipher the tachyon constant.
In the 2006-2007 tokusatsu series Kamen Rider Kabuto, Kamen Riders use tachyon powered rider belts known as Zecters to combat the Worms, who have an ability to move faster-than-light. The main protagonist, Souji Tendou can use an upgrade called the Hyper Zecter to perform faster than light travel, enabling him to travel back in time.
In Space Battleship Yamato, the wave motion engine uses tachyons to enable faster-than-light travel. This technology was given to the humans by Iscander which already had FTL capable engines. The enemy, the Gamilus also had tachyons using engines and so both could fight at the same speed and achieve faster than light travel. The Yamato also utilizes tachyons in its signature weapon, the wave motion gun.
In Justice League, during the episode "Hereafter", Vandal Savage explains that the disintegrator beam Toyman's machine hit Superman with was actually an energized tachyon stream. This was responsible for sending Superman thousands of years into the future.
In Transformers Animated, the Eiite Guard ship Steelhaven has a tachyon transmitter on board. Lugnut and Blitzwing are given orders to steal it, to facilitate a communications device allowing Megatron to communicate with the Decepticons at the rim of the galaxy.
In the 2013 series Max Steel, Max McGrath is able to generate Tachyon Unlimited Radiant Bio-Optimized (T.U.R.B.O) Energy from his body, due to an accident that involved his late father. An Alien-friend, Steel is introduced as an Ultra-Link that bonds with him, helping him to regulate his T.U.R.B.O Energy to its full-potential. In episode The Legend of Ja'em Mk'Rah, Max's father, Jim McGrath was revealed to be an alien being from the Planet Tachyon.
In the episode "Synchrony" of the FOX series The X-Files, tachyons are suggested to be the particles through which time travel is possible. As explained by a man in the episode who is revealed to have returned from the future to kill the scientists whose work makes time travel possible, the discovery of tachyons inspire scientist Lisa Ianelli to synthesize a chemical compound that acts as a catalyst for triggering a self-sustaining endothermic reaction that reduces the temperature of a body to well-below freezing. The state caused by the reaction enables time travel by countering the negative effects of moving beyond the speed of light.
In Babylon 5, humans confirmed the existence of the Tachyon particle in 2091. By the time of the shows setting in 2258 Humans used Tachyon communications for real time faster than light communications over distances of up to 2,000 light years.
In the 2014 live action series The Flash, the team search for signs of time travel by looking for residual tachyons. In the presence of tachyons, gravity is altered allowing liquids to rise out of their containers. Harrison Wells (aka The Reverse Flash) also implanted one such device into his wheelchair to enhance his speed to defeat Barry Allen yet it was also repurposed to help Firestorm maintain stability. In season 2 a similar device is used by Barry to defeat Zoom after travelling back in time to obtain its schematics from The Reverse Flash.
Tachyon particles are also mentioned severally in the Disney TV series Best Friends Whenever and appear when time travellers Cyd and Shelby 'jump' backwards or forwards in time.
In Dark Matter 2017 the android mentions sending tachyons into a rift as a beacon to locate the rest of the crew.