In quantum field theory, a tachyon is a quantum of a field—usually a scalar field—whose squared mass is negative, and is used to describe spontaneous symmetry breaking: The existence of such a field implies the instability of the field vacuum; the field is at a local maximum rather than a local minimum of its potential energy, much like a ball at the top of a hill. A very small impulse (which will always happen due to quantum fluctuations) will lead the field (ball) to roll down with exponentially increasing amplitudes: it will induce tachyon condensation. Once the tachyonic field reaches the minimum of the potential, its quanta are not tachyons any more but rather have a positive mass-squared. The Higgs boson of the standard model of particle physics is an example.
Technically, the squared mass is the second derivative of the effective potential. For a tachyonic field the second derivative is negative, meaning that the effective potential is at a local maximum rather than a local minimum. Therefore, this situation is unstable and the field will roll down the potential.
Because a tachyon's squared mass is negative, it formally has an imaginary mass. This is a special case of the general rule, where unstable massive particles are formally described as having a complex mass, with the real part being their mass in usual sense, and the imaginary part being the decay rate in natural units.
However, in quantum field theory, a particle (a "one-particle state") is roughly defined as a state which is constant over time; i.e., an eigenvalue of the Hamiltonian. An unstable particle is a state which is only approximately constant over time; If it exists long enough to be measured, it can be formally described as having a complex mass, with the real part of the mass greater than its imaginary part. If both parts are of the same magnitude, this is interpreted as a resonance appearing in a scattering process rather than particle, as it is considered not to exist long enough to be measured independently of the scattering process. In the case of a tachyon the real part of the mass is zero, and hence no concept of a particle can be attributed to it.
Even for tachyonic quantum fields, the field operators at space-like separated points still commute (or anticommute), thus preserving the principle of causality. For closely related reasons, the maximum velocity of signals sent with a tachyonic field is strictly bounded from above by the speed of light. Therefore, information never moves faster than light regardless of the presence or absence of tachyonic fields.
Examples for tachyonic fields are all cases of spontaneous symmetry breaking. In condensed matter physics a notable example is ferromagnetism; in particle physics the best known example is the Higgs mechanism in the standard model.