Tali is a quarian, one of a nomadic alien race driven from their homeworld, Rannoch, by a race of software-based intelligences which they created, the geth. As a quarian, Tali must wear a full-body environmental suit due to her race's weaker immune systems, which also has the effect of hiding her physical appearance and facial features. Tali is first introduced on her Pilgrimage, a quarian rite where young adults leave to obtain a gift for a captain so as to be allowed to join their crew. Having completed this after the first game, her design in Mass Effect 2 and 3 reflects her new maturity. In both Mass Effect 2 and Mass Effect 3, Tali's default appearance can be changed to various alternate outfits; Mass Effect 2 unlocks one outfit by completing her loyalty mission while another requires buying the "Alternate Appearance Pack 2", and Mass Effect 3 offers one alternate from the start and unlocks another by buying the From Ashes DLC.
She is a skilled technician and engineer, and renowned in the quarian Migrant Fleet, the spaceship collective home to the race. She has additional pressure to excel as the daughter of Admiral Rael'Zorah, though the Admiralty position is not technically hereditary. Her father was also strict and had high expectations, and tried to set an example for the rest of the fleet; this made him distant and saddened Tali. Thanks to her father, she also received some of the best military training available on the fleet. Tali is very loyal to the fleet, and her voice actress Liz Sroka describes her as willing to sacrifice her life for it. Sroka uses an accent described as "unidentifiable pseudo-Eastern European, quarian Gypsy" to voice the character.

Sroka described her as being "grounded in her beliefs" but also having a certain "humility" to her. Sroka also underlined her vulnerability, which she felt was one of the character's strengths. She described the possible romance with player-character Commander Shepard as her "sexual awakening", which she also felt helped demonstrate the character's vulnerability.
Tali's name changes over the course of the series. Her birth ship was the Rayya, as evidenced by her full name in the first game ("Tali'Zorah nar Rayya"). At the start of Mass Effect 2, she is called Tali'Zorah vas Neema, showing that, having completed her Pilgrimage, she has become part of the crew of the Neema. During her loyalty mission in 2, her name changes to "vas Normandy", as she officially joins Commander Shepard's crew.