The lyrics of "Tell Laura I Love Her" originally concerned a rodeo, not an automobile race, as composer Jeff Barry was an aficionado of cowboy culture. However, at RCA's instigation Barry rewrote the song, in order to more closely resemble the #1 hit "Teen Angel". The personnel on the original recording included Al Chernet, Charles Macy and Sebastian Mure on guitar, Lloyd Trotman on bass, Andrew Ackers on organ, Bob Burns on sax and Bunny Shawker on drums.
Decca Records in England decided not to release Ray Peterson's 1960 recording on the grounds that it was "too tasteless and vulgar" and destroyed about twenty thousand copies that had already been pressed. A cover version by Ricky Valance, released by EMI on the Columbia label, was No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart for three weeks.
In 1962, Smash Records released an album, The Tale of Patches by Dickey Lee, that included Lee's version of "Tell Laura I Love Her". Another version of the song was recorded by J. Frank Wilson & the Cavaliers for their album, Last Kiss, which was released on the Josie Records label in 1964. The song was also recorded by singer Ricky Nelson.
John Leyton attended a singing audition with producer Joe Meek and subsequently recorded the song, which was released on the Top Rank label. At that time, however, Top Rank was undergoing a takeover by EMI, which had already released Ricky Valance's version of the same song. The John Leyton recording was withdrawn from sale.
A decade later, Johnny T. Angel's recording on Bell Records peaked at No. 94 on June 8, 1974 (US).
Tell Laura was one of 50s revival group Sha Na Na's most popular and beloved numbers, both in concert and on record, with lead vocals by group tenor Johnny Contardo.
The Swedish band the Boppers also released a version on their album Number 1 (1978).
German rock band Rudolf Rock & die Schocker sang their version "Sag' Laura, ich liebe sie".
Mexican artist César Costa recorded a version in Spanish titled "La Historia de Tommy". Also there is a version of Chilean singer Ray Palaviccino.
Italian artist Michele recorded a version in italian titled "Dite a Laura che l'amo" (1966)
The story of the song was adapted for stage and turned into Tell Laura I Love Her (The Musical) in 2007 by Richard C Hague.