The rolling scissors maneuver is somewhat different. Like the flat scissors, the rolling scissors maneuver is typically an engagement of two fighters of similar capabilities with respect to their thrust-to-weight ratios (and thus similar climbing capabilities), turning characteristics and wing loading. Whereas the flat scissors typically results from a failed attack resulting in a slow speed differential overshoot of the defender by the attacker, the rolling scissors usually results from a failed attack at higher speed, and overshoot. The rolling scissors is also often initiated by the attacker first diving from a higher altitude at the bandit and overshooting the bandit in the vertical, as well as horizontal plane.
As the attacking aircraft makes its failed attack and overshoots, the bandit immediately initiates a pull-up (a "zoom" climb, trading airspeed for altitude) into the vertical to further aggravate the attacker's overshoot by slowing the bandit's speed while maintaining its total energy, and increasing the speed of separation of the two aircraft. Both of these factors contribute to a larger overshoot, and an increased offensive potential for the bandit. Then the bandit rolls his aircraft toward the attacker (In ACM terminology this is called "putting his lift vector" on the opponent. The lift vector is more or less a line perpendicular to the plane of an aircraft's wings.) that has overshot him, and pulls his nose toward the attacker. This move is similar to a turn reversal in the horizontal plane, and both of these moves give the bandit the offensive after an overshoot. A skilled bandit at this point might be able to make a successful snap shot with guns, or possibly a short range missile shot, and no scissors results.
More typically what happens next in the rolling scissors is that the initial attacker, aware of his vulnerability caused by the overshoot, also rolls his aircraft, and pulls his nose toward the bandit's aircraft. Due to the two components of the initial overshoot (vertical and horizontal), if the pilots keep attempting to turn their noses toward their opponent, then energy management, elements of roll and turn (as in the flat scissors; although in the rolling scissors there are no reverses of turn), as well as climbs and descents will be required to maintain maneuvering that might, if successful, result in a position from which a shot can be made. What evolves therefore in the rolling scissors is a maneuver that is essentially two aircraft barrel-rolling, involving rolling and looping motions, climbing and descending and turning while the aircraft rolls around its longitudinal axis. The barrel roll has a vertical component which the aileron roll lacks. Unfortunately, the two maneuvers are often confused in many contexts, or are used as if they are interchangeable terms. They are not. The "snap roll" is yet another maneuver, commonly seen in aerobatics performances, and is similar to a flat spin (thus involving an aerodynamic stall) and is not typically of any use in ACM) around each other's flight path, which might look like two interwoven cork-screws, or a double helix. The more barrel rolls that are flown in the rolling scissors, the more nearly the rolls become horizontal only, as each pilot attempts to deplete enough forward speed to place his fighter behind the other.
By imagining the difference between the initial conditions of the flat and rolling scissors, one can see how that the addition of the vertical component of the initial overshoot turns the rolling scissor engagement into a three-dimensional rolling encounter. Unlike the flat scissors which results in a fight to roll and turn the plane quickly, reverse turn quickly, and attempt to deplete energy in order to get behind the other aircraft to set up a successful shot, the contest in the rolling scissors is still one of successfully controlling forward motion so as to maneuver behind the other aircraft (get "on his six" in fighter pilot terminology). In the rolling scissors, the successful pilot is the one who best manages his energy in the climbs and descents of the barrel rolls, as they eventually come to have a larger overall effect on the reduction of forward speed than the simpler strategies used to reduce thrust, add drag or time the rolls and turns in the flat scissors.
The rolling scissors decidedly favors an aircraft with a power advantage over a bandit, so it is of some offensive value even to this day, although it is a difficult attacking maneuver and is very unforgiving of poor technique.
To disengage from a rolling scissors, the best opportunity is when the pilot is on the downward part of one of his barrel rolls, preferably behind his opponent (but obviously not quite in a position to get a shot), and then accelerate in a power dive to try to extend away to a safe distance to escape, or initiate a new attack.