The British Vacuum Council (BVC), which came into existence in 1959 under its original name Joint British Committee for Vacuum Science and Technology (JBCVST), is the body which was established by a number of professional, scientific and technological institutions (Institute of Metals, Institution of Electrical Engineers, Institute of Physics, the Faraday Division of the Royal Society of Chemistry) to co-ordinate meetings and similar activities of members interested in vacuum in the several Institutions. It is moreover, the British national vacuum body affiliated to the IUVSTA and the official channel through which vacuum workers in the United Kingdom can collaborate with their colleagues overseas.
The need for a national body to serve the interests of the scientists and engineers engaged in expanding the field of vacuum science and technology in the UK became apparent in 1959. Because of the inter-disciplinary nature of the subject no single Professional Institution could be expected to give a complete service to all vacuum workers. Accordingly, discussions took place between representatives of nine Institutions culminating in a meeting in June 1959 at which it was agreed not to recommend the formation of a new autonomous vacuum society but, instead, to set up a joint committee composed of representatives of the participating Institutions. It was further agreed that the Institute of Physics would provide a permanent secretariat for the Committee, which would be paid for from a small annual subscription levied on each participating Institution. The JBCVST held its first meeting in October 1959 at which Dr. R. W. Sillars (representative of the Institute of Physics) was elected as the first Chairman with Dr. H. R. Lang (Secretary of the Institute of Physics) being appointed Secretary.
Further examination of the role of the JBCVST after several years' operation led to the conclusion that it should continue but with the formulation of a proper Constitution to regularize its existence. As part of this reform the title was changed on 10 April 1969 to The British Vacuum Council. On 18 November 1985, it was accepted by the UK Charity Commissioners, giving the BVC charitable status (Reg No: 292999). The original members of the BVC were: The Institute of Physics and the Physical Society, The Institution of Electrical Engineers, The Royal Society of Chemistry, The Institute of Metals, The Institute of Petroleum and The Institute of Chemical Engineers. Owing to changes in the member Institutes and their own members' interests, only the Institute of Physics now remains as a member of the BVC. The Institute of Metals withdrew in 1993 and the Faraday Division of the Royal Society of Chemistry withdrew in 2010.