Astrophysicist Jeanne Cavelos says in The Science of Star Wars that the Force raises questions that scientists have long asked. She points out that the ancient Greeks explored the idea of a "fifth element" that permeated and connected everything in the universe, and that Isaac Newton proposed that the human brain might be able to trigger waves in the ether, giving humans psychic powers. Cavelos's sources are mostly skeptical about a "real world" explanation for the Force, but they explore ideas in areas such as quantum physics, parapsychology, and the notion of science so advanced that it appears magical. Explaining the Force is particularly difficult, Cavelos says, because "it does so many different things". Several scientists have said it is best not to try to explain how the Force works.
Cavelos says the Force "suggests a universe quite different than the one we think we're living in", and that some unknown fields or particles might explain the Force. Cavelos believes vacuum energy is one option to power physical Force feats, and she says a fifth force beyond the four fundamental interactions might account for the Force. Flavio Fenton of the Georgia Institute of Technology School of Physics suggests a fifth force would carry two types of charge — one for the light side and one for the dark — and that each would be carried by its own particle. Nepomuk Otte, also from Georgia Tech, cautions that Newton's third law of motion says telekinesis would apply a force back on the Force-wielding character. Force powers like precognition are challenging to explain because of the implied time travel of information, but Cavelos suggests tachyons traveling faster than light might carry such information. Cavelos explores the possibility of brain implants or sensors being used to detect users' intent and manipulate energy fields to control the Force. Michio Kaku says Luke Skywalker's Jedi training on Dagobah might involve learning to control brain waves, and Cavelos compares such discipline to contemporary patients learning to control prosthetics.