The above efficiency formulas are based on simple idealized mathematical models of engines, with no friction and working fluids that obey simple thermodynamic rules called the ideal gas law. Real engines have many departures from ideal behavior that waste energy, reducing actual efficiencies far below the theoretical values given above. Examples are:
friction of moving parts
inefficient combustion
heat loss from the combustion chamber
departure of the working fluid from the thermodynamic properties of an ideal gas
aerodynamic drag of air moving through the engine
energy used by auxiliary equipment like oil and water pumps.
inefficient compressors and turbines
imperfect valve timing
Another source of inefficiency is that engines must be optimized for other goals besides efficiency, such as low pollution. The requirements for vehicle engines are particularly stringent: they must be designed for low emissions, adequate acceleration, fast starting, light weight, low noise, etc. These require compromises in design (such as altered valve timing to reduce emissions) that reduce efficiency. The average automobile engine is only about 35% efficient, and must also be kept idling at stoplights, wasting an additional 17% of the energy, resulting in an overall efficiency of 18%. Large stationary electric generating plants have fewer of these competing requirements as well as more efficient Rankine cycles, so they are significantly more efficient than vehicle engines, around 50% Therefore, replacing internal combustion vehicles with electric vehicles, which run on a battery that is charged with electricity generated by burning fuel in a power plant, has the theoretical potential to increase the thermal efficiency of energy use in transportation, thus decreasing the demand for fossil fuels.
When comparing different heat engines as sources of power, such as electric power or the power to run vehicles, the engine efficiency alone is only one factor. To give a meaningful comparison, the overall efficiency of the entire energy supply chain from the fuel source to the consumer must be considered. Although the heat wasted by heat engines is usually the largest source of inefficiency, factors such as the energy cost of fuel refining and transportation, and energy loss in electrical transmission lines to transport it, may offset the advantage of a more efficient heat engine.