The entropy of a system is another thermodynamic quantity that is not easily measured. However, using a combination of theoretical and experimental techniques, entropy can in fact be accurately estimated. At low temperatures, the Debye model leads to the result that the atomic heat capacity Cv for solids should be proportional to T3, and that for perfect crystalline solids it should become zero at absolute zero. Experimentally, the heat capacity is measured at temperature intervals to as low a temperature as possible. Values of Cp/T are plotted against T for the whole range of temperatures where the substance exists in the same physical state. The data are extrapolated from the lowest experimental temperature to 0 K using the Debye model. The third law of thermodynamics states that the entropy of a perfect crystalline substance becomes zero at 0 K. When S0 is zero, the area under the curve from 0 K to any temperature gives the entropy at that temperature. Even though the Debye model contains Cv instead of Cp, the difference between the two at temperatures near 0 K is so small as to be negligible.
The absolute value of entropy for a substance in its standard state at the reference temperature of 298.15 K is designated S°298. Entropy increases with temperature, and is discontinuous at phase transition temperatures. The change in entropy (ΔS°) at the normal phase transition temperature is equal to the heat of transition divided by the transition temperature. The SI units for entropy are J/(mol·K).

The standard entropy change for the formation of a compound from the elements, or for any standard reaction is designated ΔS°form or ΔS°rx. The entropy change is obtained by summing the absolute entropies of the products minus the sum of the absolute entropies of the reactants. Like enthalpy, the Gibbs energy G has no intrinsic value, so it is the change in G that is of interest. Furthermore, there is no change in G at phase transitions between substances in their standard states. Hence, the main functional application of Gibbs energy from a thermodynamic database is its change in value during the formation of a compound from the standard-state elements, or for any standard chemical reaction (ΔG°form or ΔG°rx). The SI units of Gibbs energy are the same as for enthalpy (J/mol).