1600 — William Gilbert publishes De Magnete, Magneticisque Corporibus, et de Magno Magnete Tellure ("On the Magnet and Magnetic bodies, and on that Great Magnet the Earth"), Europe's then current standard on electricity and magnetism. He experimented with and noted the different character of electrical and magnetic forces. In addition to known ancient Greeks' observations of the electrical properties of rubbed amber, he experimented with a needle balanced on a pivot, and found that the needle was non-directionally affected by many materials such as alum, arsenic, hard resin, jet, glass, gum-mastic, mica, rock-salt, sealing wax, slags, sulfur, and precious stones such as amethyst, beryl, diamond, opal, and sapphire. He noted that electrical charge could be stored by covering the body with a non-conducting substance such as silk. He described the method of artificially magnetizing iron. His terrella (little earth), a sphere cut from a lodestone on a metal lathe, modeled the earth as a lodestone (magnetic iron ore) and demonstrated that every lodestone has fixed poles, and how to find them. He considered that gravity was a magnetic force and noted that this mutual force increased with the size or amount of lodestone and attracted iron objects. He experimented with such physical models in an attempt to explain problems in navigation due varying properties of the magnetic compass with respect to their location on the earth, such as magnetic declination and magnetic inclination. His experiments explained the dipping of the needle by the magnetic attraction of the earth, and were used to predict where the vertical dip would be found. Such magnetic inclination was described as early as the 11th century by Shen Kuo in his Meng Xi Bi Tan and further investigated in 1581 by retired mariner and compass maker Robert Norman, as described in his pamphlet, The Newe Attractive. The gilbert, a unit of magnetomotive force or magnetic potential, was named in his honor.
1604 — Johannes Kepler describes how the eye focuses light
1604 — Johannes Kepler specifies the laws of the rectilinear propagation of light
1608 — first telescopes appear in the Netherlands
1611 — Marko Dominis discusses the rainbow in De Radiis Visus et Lucis
1611 — Johannes Kepler discovers total internal reflection, a small-angle refraction law, and thin lens optics,
c1620 — the first compound microscopes appear in Europe.
1621 — Willebrord van Roijen Snell states his Snell's law of refraction
1630 — Cabaeus finds that there are two types of electric charges
1637 — René Descartes quantitatively derives the angles at which primary and secondary rainbows are seen with respect to the angle of the Sun's elevation
1646 — Sir Thomas Browne first uses the word electricity is in his work Pseudodoxia Epidemica.
1657 — Pierre de Fermat introduces the principle of least time into optics
1660 — Otto von Guericke invents an early electrostatic generator.
1663 — Otto von Guericke (brewer and engineer who applied the barometer to weather prediction and invented the air pump, with which he demonstrated the properties of atmospheric pressure associated with a vacuum) constructs a primitive electrostatic generating (or friction) machine via the triboelectric effect, utilizing a continuously rotating sulfur globe that could be rubbed by hand or a piece of cloth. Isaac Newton suggested the use of a glass globe instead of a sulfur one.
1665 — Francesco Maria Grimaldi highlights the phenomenon of diffraction
1673 — Ignace Pardies provides a wave explanation for refraction of light
1675 — Robert Boyle discovers that electric attraction and repulsion can act across a vacuum and do not depend upon the air as a medium. Adds resin to the known list of "electrics."
1675 — Isaac Newton delivers his theory of light
1676 — Olaus Roemer measures the speed of light by observing Jupiter's moons
1678 — Christiaan Huygens states his principle of wavefront sources and demonstrates the refraction and diffraction of light rays.