When counting is not feasible because the clock rate would be too high, analog methods can be used. Analog methods are often used to measure intervals that are between 10 and 200 ns. These methods often use a capacitor that is charged during the interval being measured. Initially, the capacitor is discharged to zero volts. When the start event occurs, the capacitor is charged with a constant current I1; the constant current causes the voltage v on the capacitor to increase linearly with time. The rising voltage is called the fast ramp. When the stop event occurs, the charging current is stopped. The voltage on the capacitor v is directly proportional to the time interval T and can be measured with an analog-to-digital converter (ADC). The resolution of such a system is in the range of 1 to 10 ps.
Although a separate ADC can be used, the ADC step is often integrated into the interpolator. A second constant current I2 is used to discharge the capacitor at a constant but much slower rate (the slow ramp). The slow ramp might be 1/1000 of the fast ramp. This discharge effectively "stretches" the time interval; it will take 1000 times as long for the capacitor to discharge to zero volts. The stretched interval can be measured with a counter. The measurement is similar to a dual-slope analog converter.
The dual-slope conversion can take a long time: a thousand or so clock ticks in the scheme described above. That limits how often a measurement can be made (dead time). Resolution of 1 ps with a 100 MHz (10 ns) clock requires a stretch ratio of 10,000 and implies a conversion time of 150 μs. To decrease the conversion time, the interpolator circuit can be used twice in a residual interpolator technique. The fast ramp is used initially as above to determine the time. The slow ramp is only at 1/100. The slow ramp will cross zero at some time during the clock period. When the ramp crosses zero, the fast ramp is turned on again to measure the crossing time (tresidual). Consequently, the time can be determined to 1 part in 10,000.
Interpolators are often used with a stable system clock. The start event is asynchronous, but the stop event is a following clock. For convenience, imagine that the fast ramp rises exactly 1 volt during a 100 ns clock period. Assume the start event occurs at 67.3 ns after a clock pulse; the fast ramp integrator is triggered and starts rising. The asynchronous start event is also routed through a synchronizer that takes at least two clock pulses. By the next clock pulse, the ramp has risen to .327 V. By the second clock pulse, the ramp has risen to 1.327 V and the synchronizer reports the start event has been seen. The fast ramp is stopped and the slow ramp starts. The synchronizer output can be used to capture system time from a counter. After 1327 clocks, the slow ramp returns to its starting point, and interpolator knows that the event occurred 132.7 ns before the synchronizer reported.
The interpolator is actually more involved because there are synchronizer issues and current switching is not instantaneous. Also, the interpolator must calibrate the height of the ramp to a clock period.