1852 — George Gabriel Stokes defines the Stokes parameters of polarization
1852 — Edward Frankland develops the theory of chemical valence
1854 — Gustav Robert Kirchhoff, physicist and one of the founders of spectroscopy, publishes Kirchhoff's Laws on the conservation of electric charge and energy, which are used to determine currents in each branch of a circuit.
1861 — the first transcontinental telegraph system spans North America by connecting an existing network in the eastern United States to a small network in California by a link between Omaha and Carson City via Salt Lake City. The slower Pony Express system ceased operation a month later.
1864 — James Clerk Maxwell publishes his papers on a dynamical theory of the electromagnetic field
1865 — James Clerk Maxwell publishes his landmark paper A Dynamical Theory of the Electromagnetic Field, in which Maxwell's equations demonstrated that electric and magnetic forces are two complementary aspects of electromagnetism. He shows that the associated complementary electric and magnetic fields of electromagnetism travel through space, in the form of waves, at a constant velocity of 3.0 × 108 m/s. He also proposes that light is a form of electromagnetic radiation and that waves of oscillating electric and magnetic fields travel through empty space at a speed that could be predicted from simple electrical experiments. Using available data, he obtains a velocity of 310,740,000 m/s and states "This velocity is so nearly that of light, that it seems we have strong reason to conclude that light itself (including radiant heat, and other radiations if any) is an electromagnetic disturbance in the form of waves propagated through the electromagnetic field according to electromagnetic laws."
1866 — the first successful transatlantic telegraph system was completed. Earlier submarine cable transatlantic cables installed in 1857 and 1858 failed after operating for a few days or weeks.
1869 — William Crookes invents the Crookes tube.
1873 — Willoughby Smith discovers the photoelectric effect in metals not in solution (i.e., selenium).
1871 — Lord Rayleigh discusses the blue sky law and sunsets (Rayleigh scattering)
1873 — J. C. Maxwell publishes A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism which states that light is an electromagnetic phenomenon.
1874 — German scientist Karl Ferdinand Braun discovers the "unilateral conduction" of crystals. Braun patents the first solid state diode, a crystal rectifier, in 1899.
1875 — John Kerr discovers the electrically induced birefringence of some liquids
1878 — Thomas Edison, following work on a "multiplex telegraph" system and the phonograph, invents an improved incandescent light bulb. This was not the first electric light bulb but the first commercially practical incandescent light. In 1879 he produces a high-resistance lamp in a very high vacuum; the lamp lasts hundreds of hours. While the earlier inventors had produced electric lighting in lab conditions, Edison concentrated on commercial application and was able to sell the concept to homes and businesses by mass-producing relatively long-lasting light bulbs and creating a complete system for the generation and distribution of electricity.
1879 — Jožef Stefan discovers the Stefan-Boltzmann radiation law of a black body and uses it to calculate the first sensible value of the temperature of the Sun's surface to be 5700 K
1880 — Edison discovers thermionic emission or the Edison effect.
1882 — Edison switches on the world's first electrical power distribution system, providing 110 volts direct current (DC) to 59 customers.
1884 — Oliver Heaviside reformulates Maxwell's original mathematical treatment of electromagnetic theory from twenty equations in twenty unknowns into four simple equations in four unknowns (the modern vector form of Maxwell's equations).
1886 — Oliver Heaviside coins the term inductance.
1887 — Heinrich Hertz invents a device for the production and reception of electromagnetic (EM) radio waves. His receiver consists of a coil with a spark gap.
1888 — Introduction of the induction motor, an electric motor that harnesses a rotating magnetic field produced by alternating current, independently invented by Galileo Ferraris and Nikola Tesla.

1888 — Heinrich Hertz demonstrates the existence of electromagnetic waves by building an apparatus that produced and detected UHF radio waves (or microwaves in the UHF region). He also found that radio waves could be transmitted through different types of materials and were reflected by others, the key to radar. His experiments explain reflection, refraction, polarization, interference, and velocity of electromagnetic waves.
1893 — Victor Schumann discovers the vacuum ultraviolet spectrum.
1895 — Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen discovers X-rays
1895 — Jagadis Chandra Bose gives his first public demonstration of electromagnetic waves
1896 — Arnold Sommerfeld solves the half-plane diffraction problem
1897 — J. J. Thomson discovers the electron.
1899 — Pyotr Lebedev measures the pressure of light on a solid body.
1900 — The Liénard–Wiechert potentials are introduced as time-dependent (retarded) electrodynamic potentials
1900 — Max Planck resolves the ultraviolet catastrophe by suggesting that black body radiation consists of discrete packets, or quanta, of energy. The amount of energy in each packet is proportional to the frequency of the electromagnetic waves. The constant of proportionality is now called Planck's constant in his honor.