Time Reborn is divided into two parts: Part I describes established physics and its history from the time of Plato and the main established ideas, Newtonian physics (and Leibniz' philosophical views that countered Newton's e.g. on background dependent physics and his religious justification), Einstein's special and general relativity, and quantum mechanics. Part II describes Smolin's views (his "future" for physics, relying on his and ideas of others) on why these all are slightly wrong, that is, the need to reestablish time as fundamental (and probably space as non-fundamental, rather than vice versa, that was Einstein's view) through e.g. one idea, shape dynamics, a duality of Einstein's general relativity, that does that.
Smolin argues for what he calls a revolutionary view that time is real, in contrast to existing scientific orthodoxy which holds that time is merely a "stubbornly persistent illusion" (Einstein's words). Smolin reasons that physicists have improperly rejected the reality of time because they confuse their mathematical models—which are timeless but deal in abstractions that do not exist—with reality. Smolin hypothesizes instead that the very laws of physics are not fixed, but that they actually evolve over time.
Smolin asserts that overturning the existing orthodoxy is the best hope for finding solutions to contemporary physics problems, such as bringing gravity into line with the rest of the currently accepted models, the nature of the quantum world and its unification with spacetime and cosmology. Outside science, Smolin asserts his views have important implications for human agency, and on how our social, political, economic and environmental decisions affect our future, Smolin saying that contrary to deterministic philosophies derived from conventional physics, humans do have the power to exert control over climate change, our economic system and our technology.
The book's topic was the subject of the author's 2013 presentation at the Royal Society of Arts.