1904 — John Ambrose Fleming invents the thermionic diode, the first electronic vacuum tube, which had practical use in early radio receivers.
1905 — Albert Einstein proposes the Theory of Special Relativity, in which he rejects the existence of the aether as unnecessary for explaining the propagation of electromagnetic waves. Instead, Einstein asserts as a postulate that the speed of light is constant in all inertial frames of reference, and goes on to demonstrate a number of revolutionary (and highly counter-intuitive) consequences, including time dilation, length contraction, the relativity of simultaneity, the dependence of mass on velocity, and the equivalence of mass and energy.
1905 — Albert Einstein demonstrates that Maxwell's Equations are not required to describe electromagnetic radiation if Special Relativity is taken into account
1905 — Einstein explains the photoelectric effect by extending Planck's idea of light quanta, or photons, to the absorption and emission of photoelectrons. Einstein would later receive the Nobel Prize in Physics for this discovery, which launched the quantum revolution in physics.
1911 — Superconductivity is discovered by Heike Kamerlingh Onnes, who was studying the resistivity of solid mercury at cryogenic temperatures using the recently discovered liquid helium as a refrigerant. At the temperature of 4.2 K, he observed that the resistivity abruptly disappeared. For this discovery, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1913.
1919 — Albert A. Michelson makes the first interferometric measurements of stellar diameters at Mount Wilson Observatory (see history of astronomical interferometry)
1924 — Louis de Broglie postulates the wave nature of electrons and suggests that all matter has wave properties.
1946 — Martin Ryle and Vonberg build the first two-element astronomical radio interferometer (see history of astronomical interferometry)
1953 — Charles H. Townes, James P. Gordon, and Herbert J. Zeiger produce the first maser
1956 — R. Hanbury-Brown and R.Q. Twiss complete the correlation interferometer
1960 — Theodore Maiman produces the first working laser
1966 — Jefimenko introduces time-dependent (retarded) generalizations of Coulomb's law and the Biot-Savart law
1999 — M. Henny and others demonstrate the Fermionic Hanbury Brown and Twiss Experiment