When rotating on either one leg or two, the body requires reducing friction. Raising to one leg is often one source of doing this, although since it doubles the weight on the other leg, it is not effective, so is mainly done when the other leg is used to torque to increase a spin, or very quickly so that the mass is more in the air, and has not settled on the other foot.
The main method of decreasing the friction is decreasing the surface area of the foot. This is done by either going on the heel of the foot, ball of the foot, or sometimes, the toe/toes of the feet (often only possible by very light people, such as Rose in Titanic, or those with ballet shoes for En pointe known as Pointe shoe).
The reduction of surface area is not actually what decreases the friction, however. Rather, the weight of the body is centred above the point of contact, so that the centre of gravity occurs on the axis of rotation. This allows a faster spin with far less force placed upon the stabilizers. Bringing in the limbs (much like on a spinning swing) also accelerates this.
With two legs, the centre of gravity would still occur on the axis of rotation, and be centred directly between the two points of contact.
This is utilized in dance (namely ballet, with Relevé, Elevé/rise, and ), martial arts, footbag, and anything else that requires dynamic twists, changes in direction, and spins.
The friction of rotation is still considerable, however, and tends to wear, toughen, and polish the area of the foot being rotated upon. As a comparison, in breakdancing, those who perform headspins often go bald. The foot is more tailored to absorbing and benefitting from such rotations, although perhaps not so much on hard level surfaces, as our natural environment usually is uneven and has some give. This is why it is easier and safer to do by implementing one of two factors:
Reducing friction by doing it on a polished slippery floor, or ice, or wearing footwear which has less friction or is more able to absorb it, such as a sock, ballet shoe, or skate.
Increasing give (and possibly friction) but spreading the force to a larger area of the foot by having give, mostly in the surface (such as gym or karate mats).
Rotating on the ball of the foot is normally preferred due to the normal advantage of tiptoe, and the springyness of the body, which is why many martial arts encourage sparring opponents to stay on tip toe the entire match, for better movement as well as rotation. As there are actually two surfaces to the ball of the foot, and toes to grip, it also allows better control.
In theory, however, rotation on the ball of the foot is much faster. The main problem is the danger of either falling backwards or of not keeping up the pose, falling back on the balls of the foot. Twists done on the heel of the foot are often quick twists, done leaning backwards while bringing the foot upwards in an arc, so that it is more of a controlled fall that the other foot can come out and stabilize.