Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry Group Co.,Ltd has confirmed the replica Titanic will be a tourist attraction and that will cost approximately US $161 million to build. The ship will include many features of the original, including, dining rooms, first-class cabins, second and third class cabins and a swimming pool. New features will include a ballroom and theatre which were not on the original ship. The original ship's Grand Staircase will also be remade.
On December 23rd, 2017, the Facebook page of the project indicated that boiler room 1 will be replicated; the engine room will also be recreated, complete with a (mock-up) reciprocating steam engine for visitors to see.
Using audiovisual technology, the ship was at one point intended to contain a simulation of the original's collision with an iceberg that led to the original ocean liner sinking. This caused some criticism. Hollywood production designer Curtis Schnell, who is hired in to work on the project, stated that the 1912 tragedy is approached in a “very respectful way”. However, the Daily Mail reports that the collision simulation has been canceled and will no longer be a feature of the ship. As for authenticity of design, Schnell stated: “We're trying to get as close as we can. We are not building every room in the [original] ship, by any means, but the shell of the ship and the exteriors will be quite accurate, [and] there will be interior rooms to be able to tour and see from the standpoint of historical accuracy.”
Xinhua News Agency has reported that it took two years to design the new vessel with cooperation from an American firm, and that the blueprints of the original ships were obtained for the purpose of a basis for the new ship.
Construction is being done based on the design of the original Titanic, and is being assisted by designers and technicians from the United States and Britain.
As said by the vice general manager of the Wuchang Shipbuilding Industry Group Corp., construction of the replica is being done with investment from Seven Star Energy Investment, a private company based in Sichuan province. Prior to the commencement of building this ship, none of the numerous proposed full-size replica ships of the Titanic ever made it to the point where actual construction began. Despite this, in May 2015, Wuchang started making parts for the vessel. A keel laying ceremony at the site of the future resort occurred at the end of November 2016, with Lord Peter Mandelson attending.
The Twitter account of the remake, @RomandiseaT2, posted images of the ship's construction in February 2017, which show its hull slowly progressing in construction. It also posted a three-second bird's eye view time-lapse of construction on March 1. An April 10 tweet presented fresh images, apparently showing the beginnings of the stern. The images of the April tweet showed considerable and highly notable progress in the hull's construction. A string of further images, also showing the bow section of the upcoming ship, were published in the Daily Mail on April 13.
In May 2017, an aerial photo showed construction of the hull well underway at the assembly site. The Daily Mail also published further images on May 10, showing the sides of the hull beginning to take shape. The official Twitter account has continued to post images of the construction progress, which show considerable advancement.
In September 2017, Chinese website ImagineChina reported that construction was half complete. This story was also covered by the Daily Mail, which stated that six out of nine decks are said to have been built.