The company produces a wide range of weighing products. The present day product line includes industrial scales, moisture analyzers, and force gauges, and newer versions of lab and analytical balances. An up-to-date line of prescription scales and systems is available for pharmacies. Sensitivity ranges from 0.0001g for its analytical balances, 0.001g for its laboratory and prescription scales, and 0.01g for its industrial scales. Capacities range from 50.0g up to 6000.0g for the lab, analytical, prescription and industrial scales. Torbal crane scales and force gauges can go to higher capacities.

The company has produced many products thatreceived industry recognition, e.g., magazine ranking or metrology society awards. The most famous was the Model EA-1 which was the first analytical balance to use electronic force substitution. The last three digits of weight were read from a digital Veeder Root dial that was linked to a precision 10 turn potentiometer. The potentiometer output voltage was converted to force coil current which caused a magnet suspended from the weigh beam to apply a linear force to bring the mechanism into a precise balance condition. Also in the balance an E-Core type structure was used to detect the beam position and the result was displayed on an electronic zero center null meter. The first three decades were done with digital weight loading dials. This balance, which was marketed starting in the early 1960s, is still in use in many labs around the country and they appear fairly regularly on e-bay as they are retired.
Another scale of significance was the Model PL-1, which was quickly followed by a series of scales based upon the same principle. This scale was an optical projection type that was intended for both laboratory and industrial use. The first decade was a digital weight loader which was used to bring the beam close enough to a null position so that the next three digits could be read directly off of an optical projection screen. Many people claimed that the optical portion of the scale was accurate to four places, however, reading a linear dial projection to four places without a vermier is a real feat. In this scale the beam deflection moved a glass plate which contained the graduated scale and the image was projected onto a screen in the front of the scale. The scale used a viscous fluid dashpot type of damping system and was remarkably fast. It soon became the favorite scale for many industrial applications because the torsion type taut band suspension made it very rugged and the simplicity of weighing combined with its fast damping made QC testing a simple chore.
One other scale that is deserving of recognition is the Model ST-1, which was designed specifically to be a student balance that could be used in high school and college chemistry labs to do accurate weighing (0.01% can’t be called precision) and allow students to develop a feel for weighing. The scale’s structure was actually half of an equal arm Roberval balance. A calibrated dial with a calibrated spring attached to it was used to apply a restoring torque to equal that of the torque applied by the unknown weight. With an attractive price this scale soon became very popular in schools across the nation.

Torbal's scales are used for pill counting and for drug compounding. The only mechanical pharmacy balance still manufactured by Torbal is the DRX-3.