This section refers to the towing of a cargo-carrying device behind a truck or car.
Most trailers fit into one of three categories:
Small trailers that attach to cars and small trucks (SUVs, minivans, etc.):
Small enclosed trailers are fully covered by four sides and a roof. These types of trailers are generally used for carrying livestock since they protect the contents from weather. People also rent these types of trailers for moving boxes, furniture and other materials.
Boat trailers are used specifically for pulling boats. These types of trailers are designed for easy loading in and out of the water and are purchased based on the specific type and style of boat they will be hauling. They are open trailers that are specially shaped to hold and secure boats, but because of this specialty, they are a unique category.
Recreational vehicles (RV) are utility vehicles or vans that are often equipped with living facilities. While some are self-propelled (integrated truck chassis), many are designed as trailers to be attached to a trailer hitch. These trailer hitches are common on the back of many cars and trucks, and RV trailers are commonly used for camping outings or road trips. In the United Kingdom, RV trailers are known as caravans.

Trailers designed to be hauled in a "big rig" (18-wheel) tractor-trailer configuration, which come in many configurations:
Flat bed or open trailers, which are platforms with no sides or stakes. This type of trailer works well for hauling large or unconventional shaped objects. Some are small enough to be towed behind cars.
Tank trailers, which are trailers designed to contain liquids such as milk, water or motor fuel.
Container trailers are standard intermodal "boxes" that can be fitted with a dolly (wheel truck) and front stand; they can then be used in a standard tractor-trailer combination. The containers are also stacked on ships and used as railroad boxcars.
Non-containerized tractor-trailer boxes are also fairly common, and work much like containters, above, but frequently with the stand and dolly integrated permanently into the box.

Trailers for speciality applications that may require a specialized vehicle, such as a farm tractor; military truck, tank, or personnel carrier; or an unusually large "big rig." Unpowered train cars pulled behind a locomotive can also be considered in this category.