Perhaps pulsated power delivery from a 1,2,3 or four IC cylinder engine could be considered the original traction control. IC engine power pulses are usually considered to be from 45 crankshaft degrees (high compression plus aggressive camshaft) to as much as 100 degrees (low compression, mild valve timing, often supercharged). A single cylinder vehicle (e.g. motorcycle) will have a power pulse and the driven tire momentarily will slip more than the optimum necessary for maximum thrust (3-5 % pavement, 15-250 % on dirt track). The engine flywheel will tend to maintain this speed but friction of many types will cause greater or lesser slowing down over the subsequent exhaust and intake strokes totaling about a full 360 degrees crankshaft revolution. Analogous to modern active systems is when the following compression stroke causes a large decrease in drivetrain speed including the tire. Often this effect will cause the tire to "grab" the road or track surface momentarily so that the immediately following power pulse can have more thrust-effect than otherwise. A dirt or pavement racing vehicle can thus be more effecively driven with rough power delivery than with perfectly smooth "dial-a-torque" power (electric motor, gas/steam turbine, 12+cylinder IC engine). Dirt track racing motorcycles have long experimented with flywheel inertia and compression ratios to get a desirable balance of roughness and smoothness. Triumph 360 degree vertical twin engines were often modified to be "Twingles" i.e. - both cylinders firing simultaneously. Harley Davidson V-Twin engines were modified so that the front cylinder fired 45 degrees after the rear one. These practices were AMA-outlawed in the 1950s. This effect is also readily apparent if one experiments with a 4-cylinder car with a perfectly flexible and willing engine coupled to a manual transmission. Very slow engine operation from 125 rpm down to 25 rpm (usually in 2nd, 3rd or 4th gears) often will allow climbing polished icy surfaces without resorting to sand or chains. (caution! - NO OIL PRESSURE available at those rpms). In the 1990s Grand Prix roadracing motorcycles once more experiemnted with rough power delivery. Commonly all 4 cylinders of a 2 or 4-cycle engine were fired in 180 degrees (2- stroke) or 360 degrees (4-stroke) in order to enhance the riders ability to modulate engine power coming out of corners. The predecessor of modern electronic traction control systems can be found in high-torque, high-power rear-wheel drive cars as a limited slip differential. A limited slip differential is a purely mechanical system that transfers a relatively small amount of power to the non-slipping wheel, while still allowing some wheel spin to occur.
In 1971, Buick introduced MaxTrac, which used an early computer system to detect rear wheel spin and modulate engine power to those wheels to provide the most traction. A Buick exclusive item at the time, it was an option on all full-size models, including the Riviera, Estate Wagon, Electra 225, Centurion, and LeSabre.
Cadillac introduced the Traction Monitoring System (TMS) in 1979 on the redesigned Eldorado.