In 1992, Russian Professor of Chemistry, Yevgeny Podkletnov, and Nieminen, Tampere University of Technology, Tampere, Finland, discovered weight fluctuations in objects above an electromagnetically levitated, massive, composite superconducting disk. Three years later, Podkletnov reported the results of additional experiments with a toroidal disk superconductor. They reported the weight of the samples would fluctuate between -2.5% and +5.4% as the angular speed of the superconductor increased. Certain combinations of disk angular speeds and electromagnetic frequencies caused the fluctuations to stabilize at a 0.3% reduction. The experiments with the toroidal disk yielded reductions that reached a maximum of 1.9-2.1%. Reports about both sets of experiments stated the weight loss region was cylindrical, extending vertically for at least three meters above the disk. Qualitative observations of an expulsive force at the border of the shielded zone were reported in the Fall of 1995.
Italian physicist Giovanni Modanese, while a Von Humboldt Fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Physics, made the first attempt to provide a theoretical explanation of Podkletnov’s observations. He argued the shielding effect and slight expulsive force at the border of the shielded zone could be explained in terms of induced changes in the local cosmological constant. Modanese described several effects in terms of responses to modifications to the local cosmological constant within the superconductor. Ning Wu, Institute of High Energy Physics, Beijing, China, used the theory of quantum gauge theory of gravity he had developed in 2001 to explain Podkletnov’s observations. Wu’s theory approximated the relative gravity loss as 0.03% (an order of magnitude smaller than the reported range of 0.3 – 0.5%).
Several groups around the world tried to replicate Podkletnov’s gravity shielding observations. According to R. Clive Woods, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Iowa State University, those groups were not able to overcome the extremely challenging technical problems of replicating all aspects of the 1992 experimental conditions. Woods summarised those shortcomings in the following list:

Use of a superconductor disk with a diameter greater than 100 mm;
A disk containing ~30% non-superconducting YBCO, preferable organised into two layers;
A disk capable of self-levitation, but still containing large numbers of inter-grain junctions;
An AC levitation field with a frequency of ~10 kHz;
A second excitation field with a frequency of ~1 MHz, for disk rotation; and
Disk rotation speeds of 3,000 rpm or greater for large (>0.05%) gravitational effects.

C. S. Unnikrishan, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India, showed that if the effect had been caused by gravitational shielding, the shape of the shielded region would be similar to a shadow from the gravitational shield. For example, the shape of the shielded region above a disk would be conical. The height of the cone's apex above the disk would vary directly with the height of the shielding disk above the earth. Podkeltnov and Nieminen described the shape of the weight loss region as a cylinder that extended through the ceiling above the cryostat. That factor and others precipitated a recommendation to reclassify the effect as gravitational modification instead of gravitational shielding. Such a reclassification means the region causing the weight modifications can be directed and is not limited to the space above the superconductor.