Some pursuit divers rely predominantly on their wings for thrust production during swimming. These include auks, diving petrels, and penguins. Thrust production in these animals is produced via lift principles, much like in aerial flight. These birds essentially "fly" beneath the surface of the water. Because they have the dual role of producing thrust in both flight and swimming, wings in these animals demonstrate a compromise between the functional demands of two different fluid media.
Because the density of water is so much higher than air, the same wing excursion in either medium will produce more thrust in water. As a result, relative wing size in swimming birds tend to be smaller than comparably sized birds that fly only. Marine birds also tend to have higher than expected body mass as a mechanism to counteract buoyancy forces when submerged. The combination of smaller wings and increased body mass-produce higher wing loading in these birds, resulting in faster flying speeds. While high flying speeds can be detrimental to landing on tree perches for flying birds, there is little consequence to high impact landing in water.
Birds that rely on lift based propulsion for swimming have been observed to utilize higher wing beat frequencies when flying than when submerged and swimming. This observation follows directly from the logic that the increased density of water produces greater thrust for similar wing excursions, so for a given speed fewer wing beats are needed to create identical propulsion totals. It is also suggested that lift based swimmers have higher swim speeds and greater metabolic efficiency than drag based swimmers because they are able to displace greater water volumes (thus experiencing greater reactive thrust) with their wings than a comparable sized bird can with its feet.
Not only birds that use their wings exploit lift to propel themselves through water. Grebes rotate their feet in a way that results in lift generated thrust. This swim style allows the birds to swim faster and probably more efficient than if they used a regular paddling motion. The feet of grebes are quite special, resembling feathers, and the use of a lift-based propulsive mechanism suggests convergent evolution.
Many foot propelled birds, including cormorants, may use a combination of lift and drag during different phases of their propulsive stroke, where the often found triangular shape of bird feet may allow the birds to use a similar force generating mechanism as delta wings. This allows for generating larger forces, but likely also more efficient swimming than a purely drag-based paddling.