Bird anatomy is primarily adapted for efficient flight. Bird species that rely on swimming as well as flight must contend with the competing requirements of flight and swimming. Morphological characteristics that are advantageous in flight are actually detrimental to swimming performance. For instance, auks, which use their wings to swim and fly, have the highest flight costs for their body size of any animal. In contrast, birds that use their feet to swim and are more proficient flyers have higher swim costs than wing-propelled divers such as auks and penguins.
Light bones
The avian skeletal system has evolved to be extremely lightweight with hollow air spaces that are highly integrated with the respiratory system. The decreased body weight resulting from these adaptations is highly beneficial for reducing the effects of gravity, thus making lift easier to achieve. Birds that swim, however, must contend with the increased buoyancy effects of having lighter bones and a reduced body mass. Instead, diving birds increase their muscle mass, resulting in an overall increase in body mass that reduces the effects of buoyancy and makes submersion easier. This effect is predominantly seen in shallow diving birds as buoyancy effects are strongest. Higher masses in diving birds appear to be correlated with higher wing loading and consequently larger wings. Faster flying speeds also result from higher wing loading which would be potentially detrimental for small flying birds that must land precisely on small branches. Diving birds, however, do not have this constraint because open water can accommodate harder landings.
Large air spaces
Similar to having light bones, birds also have large respiratory systems with large air spaces that reduce body weight and allow more efficient oxygen exchange required for the high metabolic demands of flight. Birds also have specialized structures called air sacs closely associated with their lungs that store air when the animal inspires, further reducing body weight and maintaining the partial pressure of oxygen within the lungs equal to that of the surrounding environment. While highly beneficial for flight, decreasing body weight (and thus whole body density) increases buoyancy forces and makes maintaining submerged depth more difficult. Swimming birds have been observed to exhale before dives, reducing their air volume and thus their overall body density. Other studies have suggested that diving birds increase their blood oxygen stores thus simultaneously reducing the amount of oxygen they must retain in their lungs when diving and allowing them to dive for longer durations.
Plumage
Bird plumage is intended to hold and deflect air to make lift easier to achieve in flight. Again, this adaptation is detrimental to swimming because the increased air volume increases buoyancy forces. Some diving birds have been observed to preen immediately before diving, and some researchers believe that this may expel the stored air and reduce the air volume, thus increasing over all body density, decreasing buoyancy effects and making submersion easier.
Behavior
Cormorants have been observed to alter their swimming behavior with changes in body buoyancy. When body weight (and thus buoyancy) was artificially altered, horizontally swimming cormorants reduced the angle of body tilt when additional weight was added and increased the tilt angle when weight was removed. When enough weight was added to make the birds negatively buoyant, the birds angled their bodies upwards so that the thrust produced by paddling their hind-limbs acted to keep them from sinking. In other words, these birds can dynamically adjust the tilt of their bodies to adapt to changing buoyancies. Because air spaces are compressed with increased depth, diving birds must be capable of adapting to changing buoyancies throughout a dive. In fact, both Brünnich's guillemots and white-winged scoters have been observed to alter their stroking behavior throughout a dive as an adjustment for changing buoyancies.