Motorcycle accident reconstruction is similar to other accident reconstruction techniques and relies on the same basic principles of conservation of energy and momentum as automobile accident reconstruction plus adds the specifics of motorcycle dynamics and rider control. Proper reconstruction of a motorcycle accident requires detailed knowledge of motorcycle dynamics plus knowledge of how motorcycles react to rider input.
Motorcycle accident reconstruction follows reverse a chronological order of events, working from the point of rest of the motorcycle and/or rider backwards to a point in time before to the start of the accident sequence to when possible actions could have prevented the crash.
Motorycle accident reconstruction relies on knowledge of the 5 phases of a motorcycle accident.
Perception-Reaction: This is the phase where the rider perceives a hazard in front of him and decides on a response. Perception/reaction time is estimated at 1.1 to 1.5 seconds.
Avoidance – Braking/Steering: In this next phase, the rider typically engages in some type of avoidance using steering or braking using the front brake, rear brake or a combination. Physical evidence at the scene combined with statements from witnesses can give clues as to what type of avoidance occurred.
Pre-impact Sliding: During braking, riders may overuse the motorcycle brakes, resulting in locking the front and/or rear wheel. If the front wheel locks, the rider will almost certainly lose control and crash. If the rider loses control and crashes while braking, the motorcycle and rider usually separate and slide in the same trajectory they were moving in before the crash.
Impact: The bike and/or rider may collide with other object like a vehicle or guardrail. Damage caused by impact can be evaluated and combined with sliding distance to help determine the motorcycle’s speed during the accident sequence.
Post-impact Motion: After impact, additional movement to the point of final rest can occur. The rider frequently separates from the motorcycle and travels independently to the final point of rest. Analysis of post-impact travel distance can also determine speeds associated with the accident.