Congestion charge cameras to detect vehicles inside the chargeable area which have not paid the appropriate fee
High-occupancy vehicle lane cameras to identify vehicles violating occupancy requirements.
Level crossing cameras to identifying vehicles crossing railways at grade
Noise pollution cameras that record evidence of heavy vehicles that break noise regulations by using compression release engine brakes
Parking cameras which issue citations to vehicles which are illegally parked or which were not moved from a street at posted times.
Toll-booth cameras to identify vehicles proceeding through a toll booth without paying the toll
Turn cameras at intersections where specific turns are prohibited on red. This type of camera is mostly used in cities or heavy populated areas.
Automatic number plate recognition systems can be used for multiple purposes, including identifying untaxed and uninsured vehicles, stolen cars and potentially mass surveillance of motorists .
Bus lane cameras that detect vehicles that should not be in the bus lane. These may be mounted on buses themselves as well as by the roadside.
Fixed camera systems can be housed in boxes, or mounted on poles beside the road, or attached to gantries over the road, or to overpasses or bridges. Cameras can be concealed, for example in garbage bins.
Mobile speed cameras may be hand-held, tripod mounted, or vehicle-mounted. In vehicle-mounted systems, detection equipment and cameras can be mounted to the vehicle itself, or simply tripod mounted inside the vehicle and deployed out a window or door. If the camera is fixed to the vehicle, the enforcement vehicle does not necessarily have to be stationary, and can be moved either with or against the flow of traffic. In the latter case, depending on the direction of travel, the target vehicle's relative speed is either added or subtracted from the enforcement vehicle's own speed to obtain its actual speed. The speedometer of the camera vehicle needs to be accurately calibrated.
Some number plate recognition systems can also be used from vehicles.