Despite the relatively recent naming of the field of tribology, quantitative studies of friction can be traced as far back as 1493, when Leonardo da Vinci first noted the two fundamental ‘laws’ of friction. According to da Vinci, frictional resistance was the same for two different objects of the same weight but making contact over different widths and lengths. He also observed that the force needed to overcome friction doubles as weight doubles. However, da Vinci's findings remained unpublished in his notebooks.
The two fundamental ‘laws’ of friction were first published (in 1699) by Guillaume Amontons, with whose name they are now usually associated, they state that:
the force of friction acting between two sliding surfaces is proportional to the load pressing the surfaces together
the force of friction is independent of the apparent area of contact between the two surfaces.
Although not universally applicable, these simple statements hold for a surprisingly wide range of systems. These laws were further developed by Charles-Augustin de Coulomb (in 1785), who noticed that sliding (kinetic) friction is independent of the sliding velocity.
In 1798, Charles Hatchett and Henry Cavendish carried out the first reliable test on frictional wear. In a study commissioned by the Privy Council of the UK, they used a simple reciprocating machine to evaluate the wear rate of gold coins. They found that coins with grit between them wore at a faster rate compared to self-mated coins. In 1953, John. F Archard developed the Archard equation which describes sliding wear and is based on the theory of asperity contact.
Other pioneers of tribology research are Australian physicist Frank Philip Bowden and British physicist David Tabor, both of Cavendish Laboratory. Together they authored the seminal textbook The Friction and Lubrication of Solids (Part I originally published in 1950 and Part II in 1964). Michael J. Neale was another leader in the field during the mid-to-late 1900's. He specialized in solving problems in machine design by applying his knowledge of tribology. Neale was respected as an educator with a gift for integrating theoretical work with his own practical experience to produce easy-to-understand design guides. The Tribology Handbook, which he first edited in 1973 and updated in 1995, is still used around the world and forms the basis of numerous training courses for engineering designers.
Duncan Dowson surveyed the history of tribology in his 1997 book History of Tribology (2nd edition). This covers developments from prehistory, through early civilizations (Mesopotamia, ancient Egypt) and highlights the key developments up to the end of the twentieth century.