A double-action/single-action (DA/SA) firearm combines the features of both mechanisms. This action type is also known as traditional double-action (TDA).
The term "DA/SA" typically denotes a semi-automatic, while in a revolver, "double action" generally means a weapon combining the ability to fire both double- and single-action, as opposed to a plain single-action revolver.
In simple terms, "double-action" refers to a gun trigger mechanism that both cocks the hammer and then releases the sear, thus performing two actions, hence double action. However, although "double action" actually refers to a gun that cocks and releases the hammer with a trigger pull, in practice, most "double action" guns feature both single- and double-action abilities. This is opposed to "DAO" or "Double Action Only" firearms, which lack the ability to fire in single-action mode.
In a traditional double-action mechanism, the trigger mechanism has features that both allow the trigger to cock and release the hammer/striker when fully pulled, or to merely lock the hammer/striker in the cocked position when it is pulled to the rear and the trigger is not depressed. In a revolver, this means that simply squeezing the trigger when the hammer is lowered will both cock and release it. If the user uses their thumb to pull the hammer to the back, but doesn't press the trigger, the mechanism will lock the hammer in the cocked position until the trigger is pressed, just like a single action. Firing in double action mode gives greater rapidity of fire, but a longer, heavier trigger pull, which can limit accuracy compared to the lighter, shorter trigger pull of a single-action only handgun.
In a DA/SA semi-automatic handgun, the trigger mechanism functions identically to that of a DA revolver. However, this is combined with the ability of most semi-automatics to self-cock the hammer when firing. Thus, the weapon can be carried with the hammer down on a loaded chamber, reducing perceived danger of carrying a single-action semi-automatic. When the user is ready to fire, simply pulling the trigger, in double action mode, will cock and release the hammer. When the weapon fires, the cycling slide will automatically cock the hammer to the rear, meaning that the rest of the shots fired will be in single-action mode, unless the hammer is manually lowered again. This gives the positive aspects of a single-action trigger without the need to carry "cocked and locked" (with a loaded chamber and cocked hammer), or with an empty chamber, which requires the user to chamber a round before firing.
A potential drawback of a DA/SA weapon is that the shooter must master two different trigger pulls: the longer, heavier DA first pull and the shorter, lighter subsequent SA pulls. The difference between these trigger pulls can affect the accuracy of the crucial first few shots in an emergency situation. Although there is little need for a safety on a DA/SA handgun when carrying it loaded with the hammer down, after the first shots are fired, the hammer will be cocked and the chamber loaded. Thus, most DA/SA guns either feature a conventional safety that prevents the hammer from dropping, or a "decocker" - a lever that safely drops the hammer (i.e. decocks the gun) without fear of the gun firing. The latter is the more popular because, without a decocker, the user is forced to lower the hammer by hand onto a loaded chamber, with all of the attendant safety risks that involves, in order to return the gun to double-action mode. Revolvers almost never feature safeties, since they are traditionally carried un-cocked, and the hammer requires the user to physically cock it, unlike a DA/SA gun, which cocks itself every time the slide is cycled.
There are thousands of examples of DA/SA semi-automatics, the Walther PPK being the first, followed up by the Walther P38. Modern examples include weapons such as Beretta 92, among hundreds of others. Almost all revolvers that are not specified as single-action models are capable of firing in both double- and single-action mode, for example, the Smith & Wesson Model 27, S&W Model 60, the Colt Police Positive, Colt Python, etc. Early double-action revolvers included the Beaumont–Adams and Tranter black-powder muzzleloaders. There are some revolvers that can only be fired in double-action mode (DAO), but that is almost always due to existing double-action/single-action models being modified so that the hammer cannot be cocked manually, rather than from weapons designed that way from the factory.