A debate has emerged between fans of real-time and turn-based video games (usually some type of strategy or role-playing game) based on the merits of each system.
Various arguments are made by proponents. Arguments made in favor of turn-based systems include:
The extra time available to players in turn-based systems allow them to plan their moves to a greater degree, and permit game designers to offer additional tactical and gameplay options. The same options when used in combination with the time-pressures of real-time games, on the other hand, can cause new players to feel overwhelmed.
Games are fairer due to a lack of reliance upon player reflexes. A player with slower reflexes is not at a disadvantage compared to faster players; rather, only the ability to think through and solve the current problem is important.
Games can in theory have better artificial intelligence due to the greater amount of computer processing power available to them.
It is more realistic to control multiple units intelligently using this system, as players do not have to divide their attention among multiple independent units all moving simultaneously. Likewise, it is easier to keep track of what the enemy is doing at all times since the player is typically informed of every move in advance (not taking into account fog of war).
Arguments made in favor of real-time systems include:
Armies pausing mid-combat to take turns and act in a sequential manner is unrealistic. Real-life combat occurs simultaneously with no side pausing to let the other side move; (However, this only pertains to sequential turn-based systems, not "we-go" systems.)
Thinking (and acting) quickly is part of the strategy and constitutes an additional element of challenge.
Real-time systems are viscerally exciting and add to players' sense of immersion. I.e. players feel more like they are really "there" and experiencing game events first-hand.
Turn-based games have too many rules and are difficult to master.
Real-time games are more multiplayer-friendly; sitting around and waiting while other players take their turns can become tiresome.
The added element of a shared clock ensures that each situation cannot be reduced to an easily repeatable sequential series of steps. Rather, the reliance upon player timing ensures that outcomes are highly variable.