Ultra-high vacuum is necessary for many surface analytic techniques such as:
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
Auger electron spectroscopy (AES)
Secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS)
Thermal desorption spectroscopy (TPD)
Thin film growth and preparation techniques with stringent requirements for purity, such as molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), UHV chemical vapor deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD) and UHV pulsed laser deposition (PLD)
Angle resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES)
Field emission microscopy and Field ion microscopy
Atom Probe Tomography (APT)
UHV is necessary for these applications to reduce surface contamination, by reducing the number of molecules reaching the sample over a given time period. At 0.1 mPa (10−6 Torr), it only takes 1 second to cover a surface with a contaminant, so much lower pressures are needed for long experiments.
UHV is also required for:
Particle accelerators The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) has three UH vacuum systems. The lowest pressure is found in the pipes the proton beam speeds through near the interaction (collision) points. Here helium cooling pipes also act as cryopumps. The maximum allowable pressure is 10−6 Pa (10−8 mbar)
Gravitational wave detectors such as LIGO, VIRGO, GEO 600, and TAMA 300. The LIGO experimental apparatus is housed in a 10,000 m3 (353,000 cu.ft.) vacuum chamber at 10−7 Pa (10−9 mbar) in order to eliminate temperature fluctuations and sound waves which would jostle the mirrors far too much for gravity waves to be sensed.
Atomic physics experiments which use cold atoms, such as ion trapping or making Bose–Einstein condensates
and, while not compulsory, can prove beneficial in applications such as:
Molecular beam epitaxy, E-beam evaporation, sputtering and other deposition techniques.
Atomic force microscopy. High vacuum enables high Q factors on the cantilever oscillation.
Scanning tunneling microscopy. High vacuum reduces oxidation and contamination, hence enables imaging and the achievement of atomic resolution on clean metal and semiconductor surfaces, e.g. imaging the surface reconstruction of the unoxidized silicon surface.
Electron-beam lithography