Uncertainty is sometimes classified into two categories, although the validity of this categorization is open to debate. These categories are prominently seen in medical applications.
Aleatoric uncertainty
Aleatoric uncertainty is also known as statistical uncertainty, and is representative of unknowns that differ each time we run the same experiment. For example, a single arrow shot with a mechanical bow that exactly duplicates each launch (the same acceleration, altitude, direction and final velocity) will not all impact the same point on the target due to random and complicated vibrations of the arrow shaft, the knowledge of which cannot be determined sufficiently to eliminate the resulting scatter of impact points. The argument here is obviously in the definition of "cannot". Just because we cannot measure sufficiently with our currently available measurement devices does not preclude necessarily the existence of such information, which would move this uncertainty into the below category.
Epistemic uncertainty
Epistemic uncertainty is also known as systematic uncertainty, and is due to things one could in principle know but doesn't in practice. This may be because a measurement is not accurate, because the model neglects certain effects, or because particular data has been deliberately hidden. An example of a source of this uncertainty would be the drag in an experiment designed to measure the acceleration of gravity near the earth's surface. The commonly used gravitational acceleration of 9.8 m/s^2 ignores the effects of air resistance, but the air resistance for the object could be measured and incorporated into the experiment to reduce the resulting uncertainty in the calculation of the gravitational acceleration.
In real life applications, both kinds of uncertainties are present. Uncertainty quantification intends to work toward reducing epistemic uncertainties to aleatoric uncertainties. The quantification for the aleatoric uncertainties can be relatively straightforward to perform, depending on the application. Techniques such as the Monte Carlo method are frequently used. A probability distribution can be represented by its moments (in the Gaussian case, the mean and covariance suffice, although it should be noted that, in general, even knowledge of all moments to arbitrarily high order still does not specify the distribution function uniquely), or more recently, by techniques such as Karhunen–Loève and polynomial chaos expansions. To evaluate epistemic uncertainties, the efforts are made to gain better knowledge of the system, process or mechanism. Methods such as probability bounds analysis, fuzzy logic or evidence theory (Dempster–Shafer theory – a generalization of the Bayesian theory of subjective probability) are used.
Perhaps the most famous and mainstream reference to these two types of uncertainty was made in 2002 by then U.S.A. Secretary of Defense, Donald Rumsfeld, in his famous "There are known knowns" statement. When asked about weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, Rumsfeld referred to the situation as consisting of, among other things, "known unknowns" and "unknown unknowns". In this context the known unknowns were presumably epistemic uncertainty while the unknown unknowns were aleatoric uncertainty. Filmmaker Errol Morris used a permutation of Rumsfeld's statement as the title of a documentary about Rumsfeld, The Unknown Known. The film focused heavily on Rumsfeld's statements about and understanding of uncertainty regarding the Iraq war.