This persistent myth is based on a failure to distinguish between two types of decompression: the first, from normal atmospheric pressure (one atmosphere) to a vacuum (zero atmospheres); the second, from an exceptionally high pressure (many atmospheres) to normal atmospheric pressure.
The first type, a pressure reduction from normal atmospheric pressure to a vacuum, is the more common. Research and experience in space exploration and high-altitude aviation have shown that while exposure to vacuum causes swelling, human skin is tough enough to withstand the drop of one atmosphere, although the resulting hypoxia will cause unconsciousness after a few seconds. At the extreme low pressures encountered at altitudes above about 62,000 feet (19,000 m), only 0.0618 of an atmosphere short of a complete vacuum, the boiling point of water becomes less than normal body temperature; this is known as the Armstrong limit, which is the practical limit to survivable altitude without pressurization.
However, in the case of an explosive or rapid decompression from one atmosphere to zero, pulmonary barotrauma (a rupture of the lung) may occur if the air in the lungs expands faster than the person is able to exhale; if the breath is forcibly held, this can happen even with a gradual decompression.
The second type is rare since it involves a pressure drop over several atmospheres, which would require the person to have been placed in a pressure vessel. The only likely situation in which this might occur is during decompression after deep-sea diving. There is only a single, well-documented occurrence of this: the 1983 Byford Dolphin incident in the North Sea in which a violent, explosive decompression of eight atmospheres, from nine to one atmospheres, caused massive and lethal barotrauma. A similar but fictional death was shown in the James Bond film Licence to Kill, when a character's head explodes after his hyperbaric chamber is rapidly depressurized. Neither of these incidents would have been possible if the pressure drop had been only from normal atmospheric to a vacuum.