At 8:30 a.m., despite clear skies with excellent visibility of about 35 miles (56 km), the flight paths of the two aircraft intersected about 9 miles (14 km) southwest of Las Vegas. The converging aircraft collided nearly head-on at an altitude of 21,000 feet (6,400 m) at an estimated closure speed of 665 knots (1,232 km/h).
The descending Air Force jet, flying at 444 knots (822 km/h), had clipped the airliner's right wing with its own right wing, immediately sending both aircraft out of control. At the moment of collision the F-100F was in a 90 degree bank to the left at a down angle of about 17 degrees. One eyewitness to the collision stated that about two seconds before the collision the wings of the F-100F "dipped"; another eyewitness said the fighter "swooped down" just before the impact. The witness descriptions and the extreme 90 degree bank of the fighter jet—far more than the 30 degrees outlined in the KRAM procedure—suggest an unsuccessful "last second" evasive action on the part of the Air Force crew.
Moments after the two planes collided, the only mayday distress call radioed by the United Airlines crew was heard at 8:30 a.m. plus 20 seconds. The crippled airliner—now missing about eight feet (2.5 m) of its right wing—trailed black smoke and flames as it spiraled earthward, and crashed into a then-empty patch of desert outside the town of Arden in what is now the unincorporated town of Enterprise. The nearly vertical impact and subsequent explosion instantly killed everyone on board.
The fighter jet—its right wing and right tailplane torn away by the collision—left a trail of fragments as it arced downward, and crashed west of the small community of Sloan into a hilly area of uninhabited desert, several miles south of the DC-7 crash site. At least one of the Air Force pilots was still in the jet when it hit the ground, but contemporary news reports differ on whether the other pilot managed an unsuccessful ejection at too low an altitude to survive, or stayed with the jet all the way to the ground. Witnesses reported seeing a parachute drifting away from the falling F-100F, leading to the hope that a pilot had ejected, but when the parachute was located it was determined to be a drag parachute that is meant to be deployed on landing to help slow the fighter down.