There are three ways to construct UCNP-based drug delivery systems. First, UCNPs can transport hydrophobic drugs, like doxorubicin, by encapsulating them on the particle surface, the hydrophobic pocket. The drug can be released by a pH change. Second, mesoporous silica coated UCNPs can be used, where drugs can be stored and released from the porous surface. Thirdly, the drug can be encapsulated and transferred in a hollow UCNP shell (Figure 3).
Light-activated processes that deliver or activate medicine are known as photodynamic therapeutic (PDT). Many photoactive compounds, are triggered by UV light, which has smaller penetration depth and causes more tissue damage ciompared with IR light. UCNPs can be used to locally trigger UV-activated compounds when irradiated with benign IR irradiation. For instance, UCNPs can absorb IR light and emit visible light to trigger a photosensitizer, which can produce highly reactive singlet oxygen to destroy tumor cells. This non-toxic and effective approach has been demonstrated both in vitro and in vivo. Similarly, UCNPs can be used in photothermal therapy, which destroys targets by heat. In UCNP-plasmonic nanoparticle composites (e.g. NaYF4:Yb Er@Fe3O4@Au17), the UCNPs target tumor cells and the plasmonic nanoparticles generate heat to kill cancer cells. [Field] nanoparticles generate heat to kill cancer cells.
UCNPs have been integrated into solar panels to broaden the spectrum of sunlight that can be captured and converted into electricity. The maximum output of a solar cell is dictated in part by the fraction of incident photons captured to promote electrons. Solar cells can only absorb and convert photons with energy equal to or greater than the bandgap. Any incident photon with energy smaller than the bandgap is lost. UCNPs can capture this wasted sunlight by combining multiple low energy IR photons into a single high energy photon. The emitted photon will have sufficient energy to promote charge carriers across the band gap. UCNPs can be integrated into solar cell systems of a number of different classes and in multiple forms. For example, UCNPs can be laminated onto the back sides of semiconductors as a film, to collect low energy light and upconvert it. Such a treatment generated a 37% efficiency for upconverted light. Another strategy is to disperse the nanoparticles throughout a highly porous material. In one device architecture, UCNPs are infiltrated into a titania micro-scaffold. More titania is added to embed the UCNPs, UCNPs have also been used in dye-sensitized cells.