A linear actuator opens and closes valves that can be operated via linear force, the type sometimes called a "rising stem" valve. These types of valves include globe valves, rising stem ball valves, control valves and gate valves. The two main types of linear actuators are diaphragm and piston.
Diaphragm actuators are made out of a round piece of rubber and squeezed around its edges between two side of a cylinder or chamber that allows air pressure to enter either side pushing the piece of rubber one direction or the other. A rod is connected to the center of the diaphragm so that it moves as the pressure is applied. The rod is then connected to a valve stem which allows the valve to experience the linear motion thereby opening or closing. A diaphragm actuator is useful if the supply pressure is moderate and the valve travel and thrust required are low.
Piston actuators use a piston which moves along the length of a cylinder. The piston rod conveys the force on the piston to the valve stem. Piston actuators allow higher pressures, longer travel ranges, and higher thrust forces than diaphragm actuators.
A spring is used to provide defined behavior in the case of loss of power. This is important in safety related incidents and is sometimes the driving factor in specifications. An example of loss of power is when the air compressor (the main source of compressed air that provides the fluid for the actuator to move) shuts down. If there is a spring inside of the actuator, it will force the valve open or closed and will keep it in that position while power is restored. An actuator may be specified "fail open" or "fail close" to describe its behavior. In the case of an electric actuator, losing power will keep the valve stationary unless there is a back up power supply.
A typical representative of the valves to be automated is a plug-type control valve. Just like the plug in the bathtub is pressed into the drain, the plug is pressed into the plug seat by a stroke movement. The pressure of the medium acts upon the plug while the thrust unit has to provide the same amount of thrust to be able to hold and move the plug against this pressure.