Vector field reconstruction is a method of creating a vector field from experimental or computer generated data, usually with the goal of finding a differential equation model of the system.
A differential equation model is one that describes the value of dependent variables as they evolve in time or space by giving equations involving those variables and their derivatives with respect to some independent variables, usually time and/or space. An ordinary differential equation is one in which the system's dependent variables are functions of only one independent variable. Many physical, chemical, biological and electrical systems are well described by ordinary differential equations. Frequently we assume a system is governed by differential equations, but we do not have exact knowledge of the influence of various factors on the state of the system. For instance, we may have an electrical circuit that in theory is described by a system of ordinary differential equations, but due to the tolerance of resistors, variations of the supply voltage or interference from outside influences we do not know the exact parameters of the system. For some systems, especially those that support chaos, a small change in parameter values can cause a large change in the behavior of the system, so an accurate model is extremely important. Therefore, it may be necessary to construct more exact differential equations by building them up based on the actual system performance rather than a theoretical model. Ideally, one would measure all the dynamical variables involved over an extended period of time, using many different initial conditions, then build or fine tune a differential equation model based on these measurements.
In some cases we may not even know enough about the processes involved in a system to even formulate a model. In other cases, we may have access to only one dynamical variable for our measurements, i.e., we have a scalar time series. If we only have a scalar time series, we need to use the method of time delay embedding or derivative coordinates to get a large enough set of dynamical variables to describe the system.
In a nutshell, once we have a set of measurements of the system state over some period of time, we find the derivatives of these measurements, which gives us a local vector field, then determine a global vector field consistent with this local field. This is usually done by a least squares fit to the derivative data.