The second and third virial coefficients had been studied extensively and tabulated for many fluids for more than a century. The most extensive compilation was in the books by Dymonds. Recently, Thermodynamics Research Center of National Institute of Science and Technology (NIST/TRC) published a huge amount of thermodynamics data in the forms of Web Thermo Tables (WTT). In the WTT-Lite version, critically reviewed data on 150 fluids are available online. Tables of second and third virial coefficients of many fluids are also included in this compilation.

The second and third virial coefficients, as functions of temperature, of argon are shown in the following figure. Reduced temperature and reduced virial coefficients, scaled by respective critical properties, are all dimensionless. Most fluids share the same behavior.
The second virial coefficient decreases monotonically as temperature is lowered. However, the third virial coefficient has a bell shape. It increases as temperature is lowered to the critical temperature, then it passes through a peak and decreases rapidly to 0 as temperature is lowered from the critical point to the triple point. It is physically unreasonable for it to decrease below the critical temperature, because the third virial coefficient theoretically represents the repulsive force among three molecules, which is expected to increase at lower temperature, as molecules are pressed together.
The reason why the third virial coefficient decreased below the critical temperature is that it had been analyzed incorrectly. Generally the PρT isotherms were measured conveniently in the gaseous phase. Below the critical temperature, gaseous phase condenses and coexists with liquid phase, and the PρT isotherm becomes flat. Saturation pressure does not change until gas condenses completely to liquid, and then pressure rises as density increases. There is a large gap between pure gaseous phase and pure liquid phase where no useful pressure data, except saturation pressure, are available. If only data in the gaseous phase were analyzed, the third virial coefficient became very small, because the PρT isotherm was almost linear in the gaseous phase. However, if data points in the pure liquid phase were included, a second order regression would give a large third virial coefficient. The third virial coefficient thus derived would increase monotonically as temperature is lowered from the critical point to the triple point.
The expectation that the third virial coefficient is a monotonically increasing function of 1/T can be verified with equations of state which accurately predicted the PρT isotherms in the saturation region where gaseous and liquid phases coexist. Most equations of state can be cast into a virial form, so that the second and third virial coefficients derived from them can be compare closely.