Basically there are two different classes of radar remote sensors for ocean waves.
Direct sensor measures directly some relevant parameter of the wave system (like surface elevation or water particle velocity).
Indirect sensors observe the surface waves via the interaction with some other physical process as for example the radar cross section of the sea surface.
Microwave radars may be used in two different modes;
The near vertical mode. The radar echo is generated by specular reflections from the sea surface.
The low grazing angle mode. The radar echo is generated by Bragg scattering, hence wind generated surface ripple (capillary waves) must be present. The backscattered signal will be modulated by the large surface gravity waves and the gravity wave information is derived from the modulation of the backscattered signal. An excellent presentation of the theories of microwave remote sensing of the sea surface is given by Plant and Shuler (1980).
The radar footprint (the radial and azimuthal extent of the surface area to be illuminated by the radar) must be small in comparison with all ocean wavelength of interest. The radar spatial resolution is determined by the bandwidth of the radar signal (see radar signal characteristics) and the beamwidth of the radar antenna.
The beam of a microwave antenna is dispersive, consequently the resolution becomes a function of range. The beam of an IR radar (laser) is non dispersive, the radar footprint is therefore independent of range.
HF radars utilize the Bragg scattering mechanism and do always operate at very low grazing angles. Due to the low frequency of operation the radar waves are backscattered directly from the gravity waves and surface ripple need not be present.
Radar transceivers may be coherent or non-coherent. Coherent radars measure Doppler-modulation as well as amplitude modulation, while non-coherent radars only measure amplitude modulation. Consequently, a non-coherent radar echo contains less information about the sea surface properties. Examples of non-coherent radars are conventional marine navigation radars.

The radar transmitter waveform may be either unmodulated continuous wave, modulated or pulsed. An unmodulated continuous wave radar has no range resolution, but can resolve targets on the basis of different velocity, while a modulated or pulsed radar can resolve echoes from different ranges. The radar waveform plays a very important role in radar theory (Plant and Shuler, 1980).