The FutureWaves™ technology was originally developed as an Environmental Ship and Motion Forecasting (ESMF) system for the Navy's ONR (Office of Naval Research) by General Dynamics' Applied Physical Sciences Corporation. The technology was adapted to be released in the commercial market and made its first public appearance at the 2017 Offshore Technology Conference in Houston Texas.
FutureWaves™ differs from existing wave forecasting systems by employing a customized wave sensing radar capable of measuring backscatter Doppler out to ranges of approximately 5 km. The radar antenna is vertically polarized to enhance the sea-surface backscatter signal. Second, FutureWaves™ uses an innovative radar signal processing scheme that addresses the inherently noisy backscatter signals through a mathematical process termed Least Squares Inversion. This approach applies a highly over-determined filter to the radar data, and intelligently rejects radar scans that do not observe incoming waves. The result is an accurate representation of the propagating incident wave field that will force ship motions over a 2-3 minute window. The wave processing algorithms also enable real-time calculation of wave field two-dimensional power spectra and significant wave height similar to that provided by a wave buoy.
FutureWaves™ also uses an innovative vessel motion prediction process that relies on a pre-calculated forceresponse database. Dynamic motional degrees of freedom are then represented as a lumped mechanical system whose future motions are predicted by numerically solving a multi-degree-of-freedom, forced, coupled differential equation with initial inertial state provided by vessel motion sensor outputs. The time-domain solution employed in FutureWaves™ allows for nonlinear forcing mechanisms, such as quadratic roll damping and roll control systems, to be captured in the forecasting.
Finally, FutureWaves™ uses the Gravity open architecture middleware solution to integrate the sensor feeds, processing subroutines and user displays. This open architecture approach will allow FutureWaves™ users to implement customized operator displays along with physics based models of specific vessels and machinery (e.g. cranes) into the system.