In the case of electromagnetic radiation closer to the visible region of the spectrum (tens of micrometers to tens of nanometers), power can be transmitted by converting electricity into a laser beam that is then pointed at a photovoltaic cell. This mechanism is generally known as 'power beaming' because the power is beamed at a receiver that can convert it to electrical energy. At the receiver, special photovoltaic laser power converters which are optimized for monochromatic light conversion are applied.
Advantages compared to other wireless methods are:
Collimated monochromatic wavefront propagation allows narrow beam cross-section area for transmission over large distances.
Compact size: solid state lasers fit into small products.
No radio-frequency interference to existing radio communication such as Wi-Fi and cell phones.
Access control: only receivers hit by the laser receive power.
Drawbacks include:
Laser radiation is hazardous. Low power levels can blind humans and other animals. High power levels can kill through localized spot heating.
Conversion between electricity and light is limited. Photovoltaic cells achieve 40%–50% efficiency. (The conversion efficiency of laser light into electricity is much higher than that of sun light into electricity).
Atmospheric absorption, and absorption and scattering by clouds, fog, rain, etc., causes up to 100% losses.
Requires a direct line of sight with the target. (Instead of being beamed directly onto the receiver, the laser light can also be guided by an optical fiber. Then one speaks of power-over-fiber technology.)
Laser 'powerbeaming' technology was explored in military weapons and aerospace applications. Also, it is applied for powering of various kinds of sensors in industrial environment. Lately, it is developed for powering commercial and consumer electronics. Wireless energy transfer systems using lasers for consumer space have to satisfy laser safety requirements standardized under IEC 60825.
Other details include propagation, and the coherence and the range limitation problem.
Geoffrey Landis is one of the pioneers of solar power satellites and laser-based transfer of energy especially for space and lunar missions. The demand for safe and frequent space missions has resulted in proposals for a laser-powered space elevator.
NASA's Dryden Flight Research Center demonstrated a lightweight unmanned model plane powered by a laser beam. This proof-of-concept demonstrates the feasibility of periodic recharging using the laser beam system.