Condensed noble gases, most notably liquid xenon and liquid argon, are excellent radiation detection media. They can produce two signatures for each particle interaction: a fast flash of light (scintillation) and the local release of charge (ionisation). In two-phase xenon – so called since it involves liquid and gas phases in equilibrium – the scintillation light produced by an interaction in the liquid is detected directly with photomultiplier tubes; the ionisation electrons released at the interaction site are drifted up to the liquid surface under an external electric field, and subsequently emitted into a thin layer of xenon vapour. Once in the gas, they generate a second, larger pulse of light (electroluminescence or proportional scintillation), which is detected by the same array of photomultipliers. These systems are also known as xenon 'emission detectors'.
This configuration is that of a time projection chamber (TPC); it allows three-dimensional reconstruction of the interaction site, since the depth coordinate (z) can be measured very accurately from the time separation between the two light pulses. The horizontal coordinates can be reconstructed from the hit pattern in the photomultiplier array(s). Critically for WIMP searches, the ratio between the two response channels (scintillation and ionisation) allows the rejection of the predominant backgrounds for WIMP searches: gamma and beta radiation from trace radioactivity in detector materials and the immediate surroundings. WIMP candidate events produce lower ionisation/scintillation ratios than the more prevalent background interactions.
The ZEPLIN programme pioneered the use of two-phase technology for WIMP searches. The technique itself, however, was first developed for radiation detection using argon in the early 1970s. Lebedenko, one of its pioneers at the Moscow Engineering Physics Institute, was involved in building ZEPLIN-III in the UK from 2001. Developed alongside it, but on a faster timescale, ZEPLIN-II was the first such WIMP detector to operate in the world (2005). This technology was also adopted very successfully by the XENON programme. Two-phase argon has also been used for dark matter searches by the WARP collaboration and ArDM. LUX is developing similar systems that have set improved limits.